 Captain's log, stardate 42353.7. Our destination is planet Cygnus IV, beyond which lies the great unexplored mass of the galaxy.
 My orders are to examine Farpoint, a starbase built there by the inhabitants of that world. Meanwhile ...
 (continuing) ... I am becoming better acquainted with my new command, this Galaxy Class U.S.S. Enterprise.
 I am still somewhat in awe of its size and complexity.
 (continuing) ... my crew we are short in several key positions, most notably ...
 Starfleet LIEUTENANT WORF, a young Klingon, is at the "Ops" station and a SUPERNUMERARY is at "Conn".
 (continuing) ... a first officer, but I am informed that a highly experienced man, one Commander William Riker, will be waiting to join our ship when we reach our Cygnus IV destination.
 You will agree, Data, that Starfleet's instructions are difficult?
 (smiles) As simple as that.
 The problem, Data, is that another life form built that base. How do I negotiate a friendly agreement for Starfleet to use it while at the same time snoop around finding how and why they built it?
 Data, how can you be programmed as a virtual encyclopedia of human information without knowing a simple word like snoop?
 It means 'to spy, to sneak' ...
 (wanting to cut it off) Exactly, yes ...
 (to Conn) Go to Condition Yellow. And shut off that damned noise.
 Reverse power, full stop.
 That's quite a directive. Would you mind identifying what you are?
 Data, call medics!
 He would not have injured you! (indicates phaser) Do you understand this; the stun setting?
 Is he still alive?
 What? That nonsense is centuries behind us!
 Most certainly I deny it. I agree that we still were when ... (indicating) ... humans wore costumes like that four hundred years ago...
 But even as far back as... ! (indicates) ... that costume, we had begun to make rapid progress.
 Yes, you can, Tasha.
 (interrupting; angry) No! The most dangerous 'same old story' is the one we're meeting now! Those who go on misinformation, half-information, self-righteous life forms who are eager not to learn but to prosecute, to judge anything they don't understand or can't tolerate.
 We've no fear of what the true facts about us will reveal.
 Sense anything, Commander?
 From this point, no station aboard, repeat no station, for any reason will make use of signals, transmission or intercom. (crossing quickly to Ops and Conn) We'll try to take them by surprise. (to Worf) Inform engineering to make ready for maximum acceleration. We'll find out what this Galaxy Class can do.
 Records search, Data. Results of detaching the Saucer Section at high warp speeds.
 Search theoretical.
 Attention bridge crew!
 (continuing) Using print-out only, notify all decks to prepare for maximum acceleration. Maximum, you're entitled to know, means we'll be pushing our engines well past safety limits. Our hope is to surprise whatever that is out there, try to outrun it. (looks around, then) Our only other option would be to put tail between our legs and return to Earth as they demand.
 Stand by... (takes his seat, checks bridge, then) ENGAGE!
 Steady on that.
 Continue accelerating. (to Troi) Counselor, at this point I'm open even to guesses about what we've just met.
 'Beyond'?
 Are you sure?
 (nods) Reverse angle on viewer.
 Ops, inform Engineering we need more!
 (interrupting; to Data) Go to yellow alert!
 (to Tasha) Arm photon torpedoes, Weapons Station. Place them on ready status.
 Attention bridge. Print-out message, urgent, to all decks. (selecting the right words) All stations on all decks, make ready to detach ship's saucer section.
 (continuing) You will command the saucer section, Lieutenant.
 (interrupts hard) You are a Starfleet officer, Lieutenant.
 (to bridge again) Note in ship's log that at this startime, I am transferring command to the Battle Bridge. (to Data) Make the signal, Data.
 Captain's log, stardate 42354.1. Preparing to detach saucer section.
 ... so that families and the majority of the ship's company...
 (continuing) ... can seek relative safety while our vessel's stardrive, containing our Battle Bridge...
 (continuing) ... and main armaments, will turn back and confront the mystery that is threatening us. (turning to Tasha) Lieutenant, your torpedoes must detonate close enough to the hostile to blind it at the moment we separate.
 Worf, this is the Captain....
  / Begin countdown.... (touches panel control) Mark!
 Ship's log, exact moment of separation, stardate 42354.22.
 (to Data) Reverse power and hold this position.
 (indicating viewer) Lieutenant... are you recommending we fight a life form that can do all those things? (as Tasha hesitates) I'd like to hear your advice.
 (to Troi) Commander, signal the following in all languages and on all frequencies: we surrender. State that we are not asking for any terms or conditions.
 (nods) Mid-21st Century, the post-atomic horror....
 But these courts happened in our past....
 Can we assume you mean this will be a fair trial?
 Tasha, no...
 You've got a lot to learn about humans if you think you can torture us or frighten us into silence. (to Data) Are they still alive?
 Or what? Or this, or worse? Or death? I suggest you take a better look at human history.
 Just a moment ago, you promised "the prisoners will not be harmed." We plead nothing so long as you break your own rules.
 And I suggest you now may be having second thoughts about this trial! You're considering that if you conduct it fairly, which was your promise, you may lose.
 Yes, even though you're judge, and prosecutor....
 (considers it; nods) Accepted... so long as you keep to your agreement. (indicates Troi and Tasha) And assaulting prisoners is hardly a fair trial.
 (same words; same time) ... court of fact! (nods) We humans know our past, even when we're ashamed of it. I recognize this court system as the one which agreed with Shakespeare's suggestion -- "Kill all the lawyers".
 Which led to the rule: "Guilty until proven innocent".
 We'll be happy to answer specific charges. "Grievous savagery" could mean anything.
 Such as you did when you froze a member of our bridge crew? Will you be joining us in the dock here?
 I see no charges against us, your honor.
 Guilty...
 (continuing) ... provisionally so.
 We question whether this court is abiding by its own trial instructions. Do I have permission to have Commander Data repeat the record?
 Your own words, your Honor. (to Data) Exactly what followed his Honor's statement that the prisoner would not be harmed?
 If your Honor pleases, there is a simple way to clear up this disagreement. (waits until he has "Q"'s attention) We agree there is evidence to support the court's contention that humans have been murderous and dangerous. (moves in closer to "Q") I say "have been" ... and therefore we will respectfully submit to a test of whether this is presently true of humans.
 There should be many ways we can be tested. We have a long mission ahead of us...
 Actually, Ops, I've heard just the opposite.
 (nods) Make it so.
 I really didn't expect to welcome you to half a starship, Riker. (to Tasha) Is the viewer ready?
 (to Riker) We'll first bring you up to date on a little... "adventure" we had on our way here, Commander. Then we'll talk.
 Inform them we'll hook up as soon as they arrive.
 (to Tasha) Bring him to my Ready Room when he's done there.
 Come.
 (laughs, nods) Exactly.
 Seriously, does it really matter how we judge them? We're dealing with something that can juggle starships as if they were pebbles.
 (snaps) The issue isn't what we call it, Commander. The important thing is we can be dead certain... accent on dead... that "Q" wasn't joking. We're alive only because we were placed on "probation", a very serious kind of "probation".
 (continuing) Go.
 Acknowledged. Commander Riker will conduct a manual docking. Picard out.
 You've reported in, haven't you? You are qualified?
 Then I meant now, Mister Riker.
 Come!
 (continuing) A fairly routine maneuver but you handled it quite well.
 Some coffee.
 (pours himself a cup) And now I have a kind of "what sort of second-in-command have I inherited?" question.
 I noticed in your envelope that Captain DeSoto thinks very highly of you. One curious thing, however, you refused to let him beam down to Altair IV?
 I see. A captain's rank means nothing to you.
 Let me postulate something here, Mister Riker. Isn't it just possible that you don't get to be a starship captain without knowing when it's safe to beam down or not? Isn't it a little presumptuous for a first officer to second guess his captain's judgment?
 Always.
 You don't intend to back off that position?
 One further thing... a special favor I have to ask of you.
 Using the same kind of strength you showed with Captain DeSoto, I'd appreciate it if you can keep me from making an ass of myself with children.
 I'm not a family man, Riker, and yet, Starfleet has given me a ship with children aboard.
 And I don't feel comfortable with children. But, since a captain needs an image of "geniality" toward the little monsters, you're to see that's exactly what I project.
 Welcome to the Enterprise, Mister Riker.
 Already at work, Doctor?
 I wanted to say "welcome aboard."
 And I thought I should talk to you very personally about your assignment here.
 (continuing) I wanted you to know I protested your posting to the Enterprise.
 Hardly. Your service record shows you exactly the kind of CMO I'd want.
 I'm trying to be considerate of your feelings, Doctor Crusher. For you to serve with a commanding officer who would continually remind you of such a terrible personal tragedy...
 You requested this posting?
 Then, welcome aboard, Doctor. I'm pleased to have you here.
 (uncomfortably) Well... as I said, "welcome Aboard".
 Have you signaled the Hood, Mister Riker?
 And what was my answer, computer?
 Do you intend to blast a hole through the viewer, Lieutenant?
 (continuing) If the purpose of this is to test human worth, your honor, you must let us proceed in a normal human way.
 ... but in a completely useless way.
 Of course you will. We've a long voyage ahead of us.
 I hope so too.
 S.O.P., Mister Riker.
 (nods) We do exactly what we'd do if this "Q" never existed. If we're going / to be damned, let's be damned for what we really are.
 Captain's log, stardate 42372.5. Of the twenty-four hours "Q" allotted us to prove ourselves...
 ... eleven have now passed without incident. And yet I cannot forget "Q's" prediction that we will face here some critical test of human worth.
 And it's your belief that this is what made it possible for them to construct this base to Starfleet standards?
 (smiles) Perhaps it's like those incidents you describe in your report as "almost magical" attempts to please us.
 And in time we'll discover the explanation. Meanwhile, none of it suggests anything threatening. If only every life form had as much desire to please Starfleet. (stands) Ready to beam down? I'm looking forward to meeting this Groppler Zorn.
 (as they exit) Like something "Q" is doing to trick us?
 Over here, Counselor! (to Riker) I've asked her to join us in this meeting. (indicating) May I introduce our new first officer, Commander William Riker. Mister Riker, our ship's counselor, Deanna Troi.
 (to Riker) Have the two of you met before?
 Excellent. I consider it important that my key officers know each other's abilities.
 My crew and I need a bit more information...
 (continuing) ... before we make our recommendations to Starfleet.
 Good, since we admire what we've seen of your construction techniques. Starfleet may be interested in your constructing starbases elsewhere too.
 Counselor... ? What is it?
 Yes! No secrets here if we're all to be friends. (to Zorn) Agreed, Groppler?
 (to Zorn, demandingly) The source of this? Do you have any idea?
 (stands, to Zorn) That's it? No other comment?
 ... while refusing to answer even our simplest questions about it. (to Riker) We'll adjourn for now... (to Zorn) ... while we all reconsider our positions.
 Fine. I hope they find you as tasty as their other past associates.
 (with another glance toward Wes's puddle) Very good.
 (coolly) Good idea.
 (coolly) Children are not allowed on the bridge, Doctor.
 Your son?
 Oh, back then.
 (continuing) Well -- as long as he's here...
 I knew your father, Wesley. Want a look around?
 (continuing; quickly) But don't touch anything!
 (continuing) Try it out. (as Wes does so) The panel on your right is for log entries, library-computer access and retrieval, viewscreen control, intercoms, and so on.
 The forward viewscreen is controlled by the ops position...
 How the hell do you know that, boy?
 Off the bridge! Both of you.
 Picard. Go ahead.
 Have Mister Riker, and his team beamed back up! Security, could that be the Hood returning here?
 Put it on main viewer!
 Identification?
 Hail it!
 Raise all shields, phasers at ready.
 I almost hope so, Lieutenant. We face too many "unknowns" already.
 Continue universal greeting on all frequencies. Get me Groppler Zorn.
 There is an unidentified vessel moving into orbit with us. Do you know who it is?
 I asked if you know who it is, Groppler. You mentioned the Ferengi Alliance to me.
 Are you very, very certain of that, Groppler?
 All stations, give any damage reports.
 Sensor scans, Mister Worf.
 (toward Security position) Bring phasers and photon torpedoes to ready!
 (overlapping) Tune him down! (into transmitter) Commander Riker, go ahead. Where are you?
 And Farpoint Station? Any damage there?
 It's from an unidentified vessel that's entered orbit with us here. No ID, no answer to our signals...
 (into transmitter) Understand, Commander. Would you object to a clearly illegal kidnapping assignment?
 Zorn may have the answers we need. Get Groppler Zorn and bring him here!
 They're forcing a difficult decision on me, Counselor.
 But we are in the midst of diplomatic discussions with them. (turns to Tasha) Lock phasers on that vessel, Lieutenant.
 Get off my bridge!
 You're the one who has a lot to learn, "Q". With no idea of who's on that vessel, my order was a routine safety precaution.
 Captain to CMO, are you reading any of this?
 (relieved) Compliments on that, Doctor!
 Any questions? Starfleet people are trained to render aid and assistance whenever...
 Let's consider your thoughts. You call us "savages" and yet you knew those people down there would be killed. You're the one whose conduct is uncivilized.
 Forcefields full on. (to Worf) Go to thrusters! Position us between that vessel and the planet.
 Go ahead, Riker.
 From the same source as before?
 (interrupting) That is enough, damn it!
 We have an agreement which you are at this moment breaking by taking over our vessel, interfering with my decisions! (steps up nose-to-nose) You are not welcome on my bridge. Now, either leave or finish us. One of the two!
 (to Riker) Do nothing that he asks!
 But you don't. You should have long ago realized that, humanity is NOT a criminal race!
 (nods) But I had a feeling you impressed him, Number One. That's hopeful.
 (small smile) I believe I'll enjoy getting to know you, Bill. If we live long enough.
 Transporter chief, yank them back! Now!
 Get off my bridge! (into command panel) Transporter Chief, do you have their coordinates?
 "Q", I've people in trouble over / there... !
 (continuing) Everyone, at ease! That's an order! (to "Q") My people are in trouble, "Q". Help them; I'll do whatever you say...
 (hesitates; nods) It seems I did make that bargain.
 No! Do nothing he suggests!
 True, but why? Was there a reason?
 If you had earned that uniform you're wearing, you'd know that the unknown is what brings us out here!
 Let's test that... (to Zorn) ... starting with the tunnels you have under Farpoint, Groppler.
 In return for pain you caused to some other creature?
 (interrupting; to Zorn) Thank you, that was the missing part. (turns) Tasha, rig phasers to deliver an energy beam.
 (nodding) And into specific patterns of matter. Much as our transporters do.
 Zorn, you captured something like that, didn't you?
 (nods to Ops) Transmit the message. "Leave Farpoint immediately".
 (to "Q") Attacking those who captured it's... (to Troi) ... it's mate?
 (to Tasha) Lock it in on Farpoint Station.
 Let it have whatever it can absorb. Energize!
 Discontinue it. (to Zorn) Groppler Zorn, there'll soon be no Farpoint Station if I'm right about this.
 And why? Because it furnishes entertainment to you! You use other lifeforms for recreation.
 Get off my ship, you smug hypocrite.
 That's doesn't frighten us at all! You accuse us of "grievous savagery"? No, the one proven guilty of that crime is you!
 On no, Number One, I'm sure they'll be much more interesting.
 Captain's log, Stardate 41209.2. We are running at Warp 7 to rendezvous with the science vessel S. S. Tsiolkovsky...
 (continuing) ... which has been routinely monitoring the collapse of a red supergiant star into a white dwarf. What has brought us here is a series of strange messages indicating something has gone wrong aboard the research vessel.
 Report.
 Are you certain... yes, of course you are.
 (tabs com control) Picard here.
 There were eighty people on that ship, Number One.
 Captain's log, supplemental. We are downloading the research information gathered on the collapsing...
 (continuing) ... star nearby. I am concerned at being in such close orbit, but the Tsiolkovsky's research records...
 (continuing) ... will no doubt predict the time of the star's final collapse.
 Give me a theory, Doctor. Anything!
 (turning; continuing) Troi? Did you feel anything from over there?
 Madness? Mass hysteria? Delusion?
 All right. Let's bring the away team back. Set the transporter for maximum decontamination. And then full examinations and observation when they're here.
 Picard here. Go ahead, Doctor.
 Do we have a problem, Doctor?
 Affirmative. Make it a ship-wide search, Lieutenant.
 Take the helm, Mister Crusher. Set a course for thirty-seven mark one hundred eighty. Warp six.
 Chief Engineer, report to the Bridge. Commander Riker, report to the Bridge. Doctor Crusher, report to the Bridge.
 Captain's log, supplemental. I am concerned that away team member Lieutenant La Forge has been taken to Sickbay. The report: "unusual behavior."
 He wasn't violent?
 Thank you, Lieutenant. I'll be in Sickbay.
 Doctor, every person on that ship over there died. Is there any chance that whatever did it is loose on my ship?
 (interrupting) The entire crew over there somehow managed to kill themselves, Doctor. If it wasn't a disease, what else could have made them do that?
 (to Troi) Security reported he was longing for normal eyesight. A rather sudden yearning for that.
 The Constitution class Enterprise, Captain James T. Kirk commanding...
 (peers closely) ... which somehow resulted in complex strings of water molecules which then acquired carbon from the body and acted on the brain like alcohol! (to Data) Mister Data, download that information immediately to medical.
 Fascinating! Their entire crew going out of control...
 Until they found this formula, barely in time. (moves to his own console) Picard to Doctor Crusher, come in.
 You can relax, Doctor. The answer to all this is feeding into your medical banks now... including a cure.
 Absolutely!
 Picard here.
 It's not actually an "infection," Counselor.
 Thank you, Counselor. (to Riker) Number One, our security chief has the equivalent of a snootful.
 Forget it!
 Picard to Crusher. Have you made a test injection yet? We're getting indications that this condition is spreading.
 Why so slow?
 (indicates viewer) How much danger from that star? Worse case.
 Picard to Engineering. Chief engineer report to the bridge.
 (continuing) Assistant Chief Engineer Shimoda report to Medical.
 What?
 I did no such thing. I want you down in the Engine Room in case we need to move out of here.
 Attention all decks, all divisions. Effective immediately, I have handed over control of this vessel to Acting Captain Wesley Crusher.
 Acting Capt...
 Captain's log, Stardate 41209.3. The strange contaminant that led to the deaths of the Tsiolkovsky crew is now aboard the Enterprise... and our Engineering Section has been commandeered by young Wesley Crusher...
 (continuing) Number One, MacDougal -- get that boy out of Engineering.
 Such as?
 Metaphysics?
 (interrupting) Captain to Security, come in!
 Where's my security chief?! Get me Lieutenant Yar.
 Yar, where are you?
 (gathering self together) All right, Lieutenant, just stay right there. (MORE)
 (turning) Data, please go to Lieutenant Yar and get her down to Sickbay.
 (into console) Security, I want all your senior supervisors to report to the bridge immediately.
 What have you learned, Number One?
 Can you short out the power?
 Do it!
 Captain's log, supplemental. It is no longer an inconvenient childish prank. Young Wesley Crusher... (beat; softening) Admittedly a victim of the Tsiolkovsky "infection"...
 (continuing) ... is now in control of my starship. How he acquired the engineering information and knowledge he is using, I have no idea.
 (continuing) Wes, this is Captain Picard. Do you see me?
 You will now return all control of this vessel to the bridge where it belongs. Now.
 (interrupting) Because ship captains control their own vessels, young man!
 Stand by a moment on that. (toward main viewer) Wesley... ! (softens it) Wes... are you aware that you're acting strangely... that a kind of "infection" was brought back from the Tsiolkovsky that acts like intoxication?
 That's a very adult bit of reasoning, Wes...
 Because... (corrects his tone of voice) Because you've lost the capacity for self-judgment. Alcohol does that but this contaminant we've brought back does it even more so.
 It's very important I do because we must immediately put a tractor beam on the Tsiolkovsky, then tow it out of...
 Wes!
 (continuing) Conn, where are you headed?
 What the hell is happening in Engineering?
 Bridge to... to Wesley. (waits; then) Wesley Crusher, come in!
 (continuing) Data! At least you're functioning.. !
 Data, intoxication is a human condition. Your mind is different, it's not the same...
 If this can possibly wait, Doctor...
 I'm busy, Doctor. Impossible.
 (continuing) Damn!
 Do you know what the infection is? Hurry!
 What sort of thing?
 Doctor, there must be a cure! Some formula, similar to the old one...
 Not now, Doctor, please...
 Take us... (wipes perspiration)
 Worf, you know what to do. Take us out of here.
 Override!
 What's that? (hits a com control) What's that Wesley?
 Beverly...
 You will address me as Captain!
 (befuddled; then) That's true; I started off calling you 'Beverly,' then naturally, you... (shakes head) I'm still not thinking straight!
 (indicates hypo) If that's something you wanted to test...
 Decades ago, light years away...
 Yes. And... Wesley may have given us a few seconds, too.
 (stops; nods) Fair is fair. And let's credit his science teacher, too.
 To many people.
 I put it to all of you we may end up with a fine crew... if we keep working at it. (nods for emphasis; then) So let's get to our next job, Number One.
 Captain's log, stardate 41235.25. Our location planet Ligon II, source of a rare vaccine needed on Federation planet Styris IV. Starfleet has instructed me...
 (continuing) ... to engage in a friendly visit and open treaty negotiations to acquire this medicinal substance.
 (rising) On our way. You have the helm, Mister Data.
 (continuing; toward controls) Cargo One. (to Riker and Troi) Should be an interesting experience.
 (nods) It's their way, Lieutenant. Do they have our coordinates?
 This is Captain Picard of the Starfleet vessel Enterprise. Please... (looks to Troi; she nods) ... please do us the honor of visiting our vessel.
 Captain Jean-Luc Picard. Welcome aboard. These are my officers. Second in command, Commander William Riker; Ship's Counselor Deanna Troi; my security officer, Lieutenant Tasha Yar.
 Yes, Lutan: that is her expertise.
 Absolutely not. This vaccine sample is a gift of life and we are honored at receiving it. (indicates way into vessel) Will you do us the honor of letting us entertain you now?
 Lutan, we're aware of many of your planet's achievements, and its unique similarity to an ancient Earth culture, which we all admire. On behalf of the Federation, therefore, I am proud to present to you this token of gratitude and friendship. From China's Sung Dynasty, Fourteenth Century.
 Indeed?
 If you require respect from us, I'm certain you will see it.
 If there is something else, any final courtesy...
 And used for many other things too. (turning) Commander Riker, perhaps you and Counselor Troi can demonstrate.
 (nods agreement) Very well.
 Understanding has made friends of many different people. We've had a good beginning, Lutan.
 Picard to bridge. Red alert!
 What com contact have we had with them?
 (reaches his position) Make contact there and on all hailing frequencies. (touches control panel) Enterprise to Lutan and Ligonian government. You have committed an unfriendly act. You will reply immediately.
 Set for a display blast, a thousand meters short of planet surface. Fire!
 (touching panel com) This is Captain Picard of the Enterprise with a message to Lutan whom I have so far acknowledged as a friend. But you have now committed what our laws regard as an attack upon us, Lutan. And having visited us here, Lutan, you must certainly understand the power of our vessel. We have so far fired only a warning burst at you. We insist you reply to this message.
 (continuing) Opinion, Counselor. Will they injure Tasha?
 Other comments?
 Analysis, the two of you. Everything we know about them and how these happenings fit into that.
 Stardate 41235.32. I am concerned. Over a full day of waiting with no response from...
 (continuing) ... Lutan. We are now testing whether they are aware of our sensors probing them. So far, we believe we have pinpointed Lutan's government compound.
 (rises) Yes, Doctor?
 Meanwhile, you were testing whether we can replicate the vaccine...
 I'm aware of that, Doctor.
 That's true. But I've seen my share of death.
 Perhaps the good ones never get them.
 (continuing; hopeful) Yes, Doctor?
 (startled) What? (recovers) Well, yes. Yes, of course.
 Well, yes... speaking as a mother...
 No.
 (to Wesley) Why don't you sit at Ops? Next to Lieutenant La Forge.
 Is the whole ship deaf?! (indicates) Sit down over there, young man! (beat) Temporarily.
 Excuse me. (calls) Doctor Crusher, some of this may interest you.
 (continuing) Proceed with your analysis.
 A language which for centuries on Earth represented civilization, Mister Data.
 Yes, Lutan? What do you wish?
 What is required is an image of Lieutenant Yar, well and...
 (astonished) Ask for her?
 (touches com button) And now, Lutan... (swallows irritation) You have boldly taken the lieutenant from us and I ask that you... now please return her.
 Am I included?
 Wesley... thanks for taking a turn at the controls.
 Lutan is a fortunate man.
 (continuing) You've met Counselor Troi.
 Then, sir... the courtesy of seeing Lieutenant Yar.
 I would like to see her now.
 Such as saying "please" when abducting someone?
 Yours is a different world.
 Lieutenant, have you been treated well?
 My ship's company and I are certain of your gentle wisdom in that.
 Something to be carefully avoided I agree.
 Until tonight, Lutan.
 Lutan, you have granted us hospitality and the safety of your Centerplace. The gifts you give us are rare and precious. We thank you. In accordance with the customs of your ancestors, which I honor and respect, I am here in peace to ask for the return of Lieutenant Yar.
 You speak of a code of honor... but what you are now saying is called under our customs... an act of war.
 Correct! I am now beyond understanding!
 (strongly) NO! The challenge is unequivocally refused!
 Did you have any idea, Lieutenant, that Lutan would suddenly announce he wanted you for his First One? What do you know of this?
 (to Tasha) We're all being manipulated, Lieutenant, and most of all myself.
 (nods; half-amused) That thought has passed thorugh my mind, Counselor.
 If anything, worse than we heard.
 You do not have to prove anything here, Lieutenant.
 Counselor, I would consider you the last person to argue for Lieutenant Yar to accept that challenge.
 "The odds are... ?"
 I'll want some explanations from Lutan.
 I should tell you I do admire the hospitality you offer here, Lutan. A pity you began by abducting my security officer.
 (hesitates; nods) Some of it I do understand. She is a rather lovely female...
 Nothing. (pretends to hesitate; smiles) Well, almost nothing in my position of ship's captain.
 (smiles now) But it puzzles me; if you feel that way about Tasha, why have you challenged her to a fight to the death?
 But you are also a man of great importance and wealth.
 Aha, I see. Then you too understand the proper value of women?
 You're a truly clever person, Lutan. You have nothing to lose either way the challenge goes.
 (a long pause; then) I will order Lieutenant Yar to fight. (rises) And may your cloak bring you all you deserve, Lutan.
 (touches insignia) Lock in on this location.
 Energize!
 (continuing) You've both seen the message about the plague?
 We need to know as much as possible about Ligonian arms and armaments. Data, especially important will be an analysis of their combat capabilities. Geordi, concentrate on their cutting edges where applicable, durability, composition, weaknesses of material.
 That fact isn't known until the combat begins.
 (continuing) You're right, Data. It does sound like a joke. With the power of the Enterprise, we could overwhelm this place easily. Take what we want.
 Which means, of course...
 Which is, unfortunately, what this is about. By our standards, the customs here and code of honor are the same kind of pompous, strutting charades that endangered our own species a few centuries ago. We evolved out of it because no one else imposed their own... (stops; shakes head ruefully) Sorry, that became a speech.
 (smiles) I am not entitled to bore you with what you already know. Carry on!
 Then help me, please. What is a way out of this?
 (reacting) Poison?
 A theory, Data. What would be the best defense against weapons like these?
 What about those lengths of metal in the yard outside?
 Thank you, Data.
 I'll agree it is puzzling, Data, but since it involves Tasha's very intimate and personal...
 Most interesting.
 And having laid all that out, Lieut... (corrects self) Tasha... we come to a most serious question...
 Go ahead. We're alone.
 Thank you, Number One. (turning to Tasha) I was about to ask if considering that background, your apprehension by Lutan, all of that... do you still feel ready to undergo this challenge? Do you judge your condition good?
 (nods; then) Stay alive. We'll hope to do the rest.
 Exactly what do you find unfair, Lutan? They fought to the death; you saw the final blow; you know the effects of your poison...
 I certainly won't stop her -- if she cares to claim that honor.
 Picard here.
 No problem, Number One. Send down someone from medical.
 Five to beam up. Energize.
 (to his guests) This way, gentlemen.
 The challenge was carried out. She died, Lutan.
 Lutan, we can provide you with the medical records to prove her death and how Doctor Crusher brought her back.
 What the... ! (starts again) Ah yes, Wesley.
 Well! (beat) Thank you again for manning one of our bridge stations. We'll see you get another chance.
 What's the delay, Number One? Why aren't we warping out of here?
 Captain's log, Stardate 41294.5. Our destination, the Class M Beta Cassius planet known simply as Haven. It is a world...
 Conn, WORF mans Ops, DATA's at Science Station #1.
 (continuing) ... so renowned for its peaceful beauty that some believe it to have mystical healing powers.
 Such a beautiful world. Legends say it has been known to mend souls and heal broken hearts.
 Legends like that are the spice of the universe, Mister Data, because they have a way of sometimes coming true.
 Facts are not everything, Mister Data.
 Standard orbit, Mister La Forge.
 Will you and your husband be staying with the ship, Counselor?
 Then... I'll just say congratulations for now, Deanna. (including Riker) If you'll excuse me.
 I'm Jean-Luc Picard, captain of the Enterprise. Welcome aboard.
 You can visit your quarters now, if you wish.
 (continuing) See the Millers to their accommodations, please. (to Steven) I'll join you all later.
 So be it.
 (continuing) Wyatt seems a fine young man.
 I don't understand.
 (smiling; nods) Of course. Your daughter explained your telepathic abilities.
 No, no, quite all right. I'm indebted to your mother for the... the fine counselor she...
 Well, so long as you insist...
 (to turbolift) Passenger accommodations.
 (startled; then) I'm sure I'll find them as pleasant as...
 We hope you'll be comfortable here.
 I'll see what I can do. Now if you'll excuse me, I'm sure you two have a lot to talk about.
 On screen.
 I'm Picard.
 How so?
 Are you saying you believe it to be hostile?
 Agreed. But let's hope it doesn't become a defense matter.
 Captain's personal log. I trust my concern over the problems of ship's Counselor Troi are not based merely on the fact of losing a highly valuable crew member. Actually...
 (continuing) ... it seems to me that she has become trapped by a custom of her home world which the facts of the twenty-fourth century have made unwise and unworkable. I wish I could intervene.
 Sub-warp? It's several hours away then? (to Worf) Let's take a look at it. Enlarge to maximum.
 Mister Data! Am I seeing the trouble I believe is there?
 Doctor Crusher to the Bridge, urgent! (to Riker) There's no way I'll permit them to destroy us. And the treaty here forces us to protect this world too.
 Captain's log, supplemental. It has been believed the Tarellian race was extinct, an assumption contradicted now by the sight of one of their vessels...
 (continuing) ... approaching Haven.
 (nods) Continue with the briefing, Mister Data.
 Hostilites between the two land masses?
 Are you acquainted with the facts of the infection, Doctor?
 Unfortunately, we had believed the last Tarellian vessel was destroyed eight years ago by the Alcyones. (to Data) Exactly when will they reach Haven?
 (interrupting; to all) Which will create a very difficult problem for the Enterprise at that time. Our treaty here requires us to protect Haven from alien threats ... and a plague ship certainly qualifies as that. But Federation policy requires us to assist life forms in need ... which qualifies the Tarellians too. I'll want you to help me find some answers by then.
 (continuing) All of which gives ample time for your second assignment. Or you may prefer it on a volunteer basis. (beat; then smiles to Troi) The pre-joining dinner of Counselor Deanna Troi will proceed as planned.
 I'd be honored, Mrs. Miller.
 Excuse me, everyone, but dinner is served... (to the mothers; smiling) ... and by Starfleet tradition, all disputes and disagreements are thereby resolved.
 The captain's.
 Captains are not required to think.
 (raising glass) A toast. To the young couple and their families. May this union be a happy and productive one.
 Yes, it's true.
 (to Beverly) What do you think, Doctor?
 Of course.
 Captain's log, supplemental. All attempts at warning off the Tarellian ship have failed. They still refuse to communicate and I am growing concerned.
 How can you be certain they're receiving us?
 Viewer on.
 We're aware of that, Electorine.
 We will not fire on them, Electorine.
 And then?
 Can't delay any longer, then. Ready the tractor beam, Lieutenant Yar. Target ship and activate on my command.
 Engage.
 Do we have them securely, Worf? Can they beam out to the planet?
 Captain's log, Stardate 41294.7 orbiting Haven with the Tarellian vessel locked in our tractor beam. Question: What strange combination...
 (continuing) ... of circumstances has caused a woman out of someone's imagination to appear on the plague ship?
 Your business is with me, sir. I am Captain Picard, commanding this starship.
 (interrupting; to Wrenn) Our first order of business, sir, is with the threat your vessel poses to the planet below. If you still carry the infection which destroyed your world...
 Eight?
 Sir... if you've come here because of the legend about planet Haven miraculously healing the sick...
 I'm... sorry, but circumstances make it impossible for us to allow you to beam down to Haven.
 This is not our planet, sir. I'll be happy to present your needs to those who govern this world...
 Override!
 Mrs. Miller, if I could have prevented this...
 And mine, sir.
 But she has claimed to be so completely honest.
 (firmly) I was not!
 Take us out of here, Mister Riker.
 Captain's log, Stardate 41263.1. We have rendezvoused with the USS Fearless from which...
 (continuing) ... a Starfleet propulsion expert and his assistant are beaming over to conduct tests on the Enterprise's warp drive engines.
 I don't understand your concern, Number One. They're not authorized to make any alterations in our engines. (MORE)
 (glancing at command viewer) According to Starfleet's message, they will simply test different ways of entering warp speed and different intermix formulas. What's the harm in that?
 Gibberish?
 (to Riker) Then explain Starfleet's report how the same tests on the USS Ajax... (indicates main viewer) ... and then on the Fearless over there, resulted in a measurable increase in propulsion.
 (to Com) Stand by for Commander Riker, Chief. He's on his way. (to Riker) Obviously, something does worry you about these tests.
 Engineering, this is the bridge. It's your call.
 Affirmative, Number One. Are you ready?
 La Forge, set in warp one-point-five.
 Engage!
 What is our velocity?
 Reverse engines!
 That's because no one has ever gone this fast. REVERSE ENGINES!
 All stop!
 Position.
 (snaps) Position please, Lieutenant La Forge.
 That's not possible. Data, what is our distance traveled?
 (more to himself than anyone else) I can't accept that.
 Captain's log, stardate 41263.2. This will be a rather unusual log entry, assuming Starfleet ever receives it. As I have already informed my crew...
 (continuing) ... a phenomenal surge of power during a warp speed experiment has sent our starship hurtling out of our own galaxy, past another, taking us over two million, seven-hundred thousand light years in a few minutes.
 (interrupting; irritated) Mister Data... !
 (hard) Just explain what brought us here!
 (beat) What is he saying, Number One?
 But considering where we are, we must assume it isn't.
 "Thrill?"
 (hesitant nod) Yes... but isn't the real point, can you do it again? Can you get us home?
 Commander Riker will join you in a moment.
 Comment is invited. Counselor?
 (smiles at Data) Spoken like a true Starfleet graduate. (nods) It is tempting, eh Number One?
 Yes, that's the problem. I know that if Kosinski can get us home, Starfleet could use his technique to send back a pure science vessel to do even more. (turning) Number One -- have Mister Kosinski prepare to get us out of here.
 Standing by, Number One.
 Warp one-point-five.
 ALL STOP!
 Yes, but where is this place?
 Captain's log Stardate 41263.3. Instead of returning to our own galaxy...
 (continuing) ... the Enterprise has gone forward to a place in the universe which is uncharted and unknown. Our ship's instruments...
 (continuing) ... have continued to operate, our motion and course sensors reveal what would ordinarily be considered impossible... (pause) ... but this is very real... our present position puts us at over a billion light years from our galaxy.
 Data, you have the helm. I'll be in Engineering.
 (continuing) Main Engineering.
 (halting the pair) How? What is troubling you?
 Maman.
 Maman... this can't be! You've been...
 Strange, but... yes, I've felt that. But why now...suddenly...
 We... we believed it the outer rim.
 (moves in; intent) Do you understand these things, Maman?
 Maman, can you tell me where my ship is? What is this place?
 (whirls; snaps) Just a moment, Number One!
 (beat) No... no, let's help all of us.
 General Quarters, Red Alert!
 I had to get everyone's attention. This was the quickest way.
 (to the ship's company) This is the captain. This is not a drill. It seems that in this place, the physical universe and ... and the world of ideas are intermixed. What we think also becomes real. Therefore, we must, repeat MUST begin controlling our thoughts.
 We will report all this to you more fully as our understanding increases. The Enterprise will stay at full alert until this crisis is solved.
 What did you do?
 What are you talking about?
 How could you? How could anyone... ?
 (whirls to Wesley) If you knew something, why didn't you say so?!
 He's unconscious. Why?
 (turning to Wesley) What does that mean?
 (reacting; to Beverly) Save him! He's the only one who can get us back!
 Captain's log, supplemental. Our position is unknown and our only chance of returning to the known universe is a dying alien...
 (continuing) ... who is generally humanoid but with a physiology sufficiently different from our own to create medical problems in caring for him.
 (to Beverly) Cause?
 (irritated; to Riker) What's the boy doing here?
 (snaps) He knows... (softens) ... We all know.
 Will he live?
 Wake him.
 We don't have that luxury. Wake him.
 Doctor... (toward Wesley) Wes... You and I have other friends aboard this ship, too. (to Beverly) If we remain in this place any longer we may lose the ability to tell the difference between thought and reality. Regardless of the risk, we must wake him... now.
 Do you recognize me? I'm the captain... I need answers.
 Who are you? Or what?
 A traveler? What is your destination?
 Yes, what place are you trying to reach?
 Then what is the purpose of this journey?
 That's not an answer. What is it that you want?
 Until now.
 Our "reality?" And in satisfying yourself, you have put my ship and my crew at great risk.
 Some mistakes? What kind of "mistake" can cause these incredible explosions of velocity?
 I believe that there may be a warp speed that could have gotten us to Galaxy M-Thirty-Three... but there is no "velocity" of any magnitude which could bring us to wherever this is. Can you tell us if our navigation sensors are right? Is this millions of light years from where we were?
 What got us here?
 Thought?!
 No, it actually makes some sense to me. Only the power of thought could explain what's been happening. Especially out here.
 (nods) Chaos. What we think is what happens.
 No, no -- none of that.
 Revive him.
 Or he was distracted by something.
 (to Kosinski) Can you propose some facts that fit this?
 (with a hard edge) Can you get us back?
 And report our observations how? To whom? (to Traveler) Can you get us back?!
 Number One, you'll take the Traveler to Main Engineering; I'll be on the bridge...
 I know.
 Strange how he seems to care for you.
 The boy?
 (hurriedly) I must get my ship back; do we have time for this?
 Encourage him in what?
 Somewhat.
 Help him to Engineering. I'll be on the bridge. We must try to get back home.
 Put it out.
 Think! Put the flame out in your thoughts.
 Now. Get to your station and concentrate on your assignment.
 Captain's log, any time entry is meaningless. We have no choice but to repeat the same warp experiment...
 (continuing) ... but wish one variation. A principal part of this warp formula will be the thoughts of everyone aboard the Enterprise. We have no idea exactly how this works...
 (continuing) ... we understand only that the Traveler makes use of this somehow. It will be most important that those aboard avoid random thoughts that might change the reality of what we're attempting to do.
 Any further advice, Counselor?
 ALL DECKS, THIS IS THE CAPTAIN SPEAKING. ALL DECKS...
 (amplified) ... I MUST HAVE YOUR FULL ATTENTION. IN A FEW MOMENTS AS WE ATTEMPT TO WARP BACK HOME, IT IS VITAL... ABSOLUTELY VITAL, THAT YOU CENTER YOUR THOUGHTS ON YOUR DUTY... OR UPON THE WELFARE OF THE ONE CALLED 'THE TRAVELER.' THINK OF GIVING HIM SOME...
 (amplified) ... OF YOUR STRENGTH. URGENT. THIS IS AN ORDER. YOU MUST TRY TO DO THIS.
 (continuing; amplified) YOU WILL ATTEMPT NOW TO CONCENTRATE COMPLETELY ON EITHER YOUR DUTY OF THE MOMENT... OR UPON THE TRAVELER... ON HIS WELL BEING. / 
 (amplified) THINK OF HIM AS SOMEONE YOU CARE DEEPLY ABOUT.
 And now to focus their thoughts on that...
 (continuing; amplified) ... ALL DECKS, ALL STATIONS, GO TO BATTLE STATIONS.
 Helm, set in warp one point five, retroactive course.
 (into Com) Bridge to Engineering...Standby.
 On my order, Mister Data... Mister La Forge...
 Engage!
 It's not happening... not enough...
 Gone?
 Attention all decks. This is to inform you that the Traveler has left us. With your support, he has returned us to our galaxy. Wherever he has gone, we wish him well.
 (continuing; to Riker) Have the boy come up on the bridge, Number One.
 Our next assignment is on this heading?
 Mister Data, Mister La Forge... Increase to warp five. Same heading.
 Come onto the bridge, Wesley. (as Wesley hesitates) Move!
 Commander Riker told me how supportive you were in Engineering. Well done.
 (continuing) At ease -- sit here in Command.
 Oh, that's true. I can't waive them again. (to Wesley) Only commissioned officers.
 (interrupting) Please don't interrupt me, Wesley.
 (to Riker) Any commission rank? (he pauses) Even an ensign?
 Well, then, I'll have to make him an Acting Ensign. (he touches a switch) Captain's log Stardate 41263.4. For outstanding performance in the best of Starfleet tradition -- Wesley Crusher is made acting ensign. With all the duties and privileges of that rank. (he clicks off) And Mister Crusher, whether the rank becomes permanent is up to you. (to Wesley) At the first opportunity your entrance application will be tendered to Starfleet Academy. Until then you will learn this ship. Every operation -- every function. Commander Riker -- a duty schedule for Mister Crusher. Heavy on study.
 Meanwhile, you can sit and learn something here.
 Why? Is someone ill? (beat; quietly to Wesley) Or do you want to go tell her about this?
 Captain's log, stardate 41194.6. We are in pursuit of a starship of Ferengi design. Our mission is...
 (continuing) ... to intercept and recover a T-9 energy converter which the Ferengi stole from an unmanned monitor post on Gamma Tauri IV -- a theft which automatic scanners recorded, providing us...
 (continuing) ... with the long awaited opportunity to make close contact with a Ferengi vessel. If we succeed in this chase, it will be Starfleet's first look at a life form... which discounting rumor, we know almost nothing about.
 Enlarge.
 What is their course?
 Identify.
 (quickly) Reduce to impulse power... !
 Fully enlarge!
 Very impressive design.
 Which does not mean identical, however...
 Damage report!
 Negative, Number One. They are reacting to close pursuit. (to Geordi) Fall back a bit but stay with them.
 Open hailing freq... (to Geordi) Why are we gaining on them? Don't anticipate...
 Yes, I read it, too. Lieutenant Yar, what do your sensors show?
 I need more information! Identify what they are using!
 (nods, rises; alarmed) Considerably. It appears the Ferengi have us right where they want us -- in their sights.
 Are we searching all frequencies? Any sign of any kind of message?
 Weapon report, Lieutenant Worf.
 Engineering, give me status on power recovery. (waits; no answer) Engineering, come in. (beat) Why aren't they answering? (waits; turns to Geordi) Go below, Lieutenant. Get me a full report from Engineering.
 Counselor?
 Which still makes it our move.
 If so, the question becomes how will they use that knowledge? (to Data) Is there any hard information on them in any file, Data?
 What kind of "traders"?
 And what does that mean, Data?
 I know what slang is, Data. I just haven't heard of that particular saying.
 (impatient) Engineering? (no answer; to Riker) Join La Forge "down below", Number One. Without our warp capacity, we're just one big floating target.
 (to Data) What other pertinent meaning do you draw from this analogy, "Yankee Traders?"
 Yes, I understand the allusion. (nods) Colors that once identified nations during the time when they competed against each other. Red, white and blue for the United States... (muses) Whereas the French oddly used the same colors in the order of blue, white, and red...
 (annoyed) Enough, Data!
 (snaps) We're discussing the Ferengi, Data! (slow burn) Mon Dieu, I wish I knew what they will do next...
 Yes, Data. That seems a reasonable assumption. (louder) Engineering?!
 I wish I knew how they are doing this to us.
 That's easy. They're wondering what we are thinking... and what we might do next.
 (thin smile at Worf) And nothing shameful about a strategic retreat, either.
 Excellent, La Forge. (to Riker) Let's throw them off guard. (turning) Lieutenant Yar. Open hailing frequencies.
 At least, I won't begin with weakness. (MORE)
 (looking up; voice AMPLIFIED) Attention Ferengi starship! This is Captain Jean-Luc Picard of the USS Enterprise. In the name of the United Federation of Planets, I demand you return the T-9 energy converter you removed from Gamma Tauri IV. (to Tasha; normal voice) Send in all language forms.
 Sometimes, Riker, the best way to win a fight is not to be there.
 Glad the Academy still teaches the strategy of Sun Tzu... (to Geordi) Let's hope that delay proves out, La Forge.
 We'll blast full power into warp nine. Ready?
 Countdown to three. Stand by on phasers. (firm) One. Set warp to nine. (everyone tenses) Two. Divert shield power to main engines... (they brace) Three!
 (softly) Merde. (troubled) Shields up.
 (moving to Data) What's wrong?
 (into Com) Doctor Crusher to the bridge. (to entire bridge) Conference evaluation.
 Consult the charts on this planet, Data. See what we have on it in the library.
 We had no response. (including the others) So, while we still have some power left, it is time for difficult decisions. (thin smile) While we cannot have a democracy aboard, I value your considered opinions.
 Impractical and provocative. Assuming even that we have the power to support that tactic.
 Your point, Counselor?
 That has been tried; no response.
 Any other observations?
 (continuing) Thank you all for your advice and counsel. Now if you will excuse me, I'd like to be left alone with Commander Riker.
 As my first officer, I assume you fully realize our situation. Although the final decision must be mine, this is your opportunity to speak your mind.
 The only one left needs no conversation, Number One. And it is the only one we must avoid.
 Total annihilation.
 Open hailing frequencies.
 (a pregnant beat) Attention, Ferengi starship! This is Captain Picard. It is obvious we have a situation here that needs resolving... And we are willing to do whatever is reasonable and necessary. I would like... I would appreciate... your presenting your terms to us.
 Captain's log, stardate 41194.8. It is with a heavy heart that I have offered to meet...
 (continuing) ... whatever reasonable and necessary terms are demanded by the Ferengi. I fear for my people and my vessel in the event the unknown Ferengi ask the unreasonable. How...
 (continuing) ... can I oppose even unreasonable demands?
 Ready. But hold at ready, Lieutenant. (to Data) Open hailing frequencies.
 Ferengi vessel, we are awaiting your response.
 (interrupting; quiet voiced) I'll wait a bit more, Number One.
 Patience. Patience...
 Who is speaking?
 What I actually said, DaiMon, is...
 (to Riker) Something has seized their ship too. They're in the same predicament as us. (to Geordi) Launch a sensor probe. Set it to search for the source of this "something" that's holding us both. (to Tasha) Back to hailing fequencies, fast. (Com technique) ... and so I regret DaiMon Taar that I can no longer negotiate unless it is conducted visually.
 (into Com) And it is against Starfleet orders to accept a surrender otherwise. Do you withdraw your surrender offer?
 (into Com) Agreed, DaiMon Taar. You should be able to view us now. (waits) Do you have us on your screen?
 Your offer may be inadequate, but I will discuss it with my staff. Stand by for further communications.
 (to Geordi) Have you launched the probe?
 (to Geordi) If we're not holding the Ferengi and they're not holding us... then who the hell is? (to Data) Next, you wanted to show us something?
 A space federation of some sort. But I've never heard the word "Tkon."
 Data. What are you doing?
 Then get unstuck and continue your briefing.
 Continue, Commander. Now!
 We'll take it here, please.
 Reaching up from the planet surface. What enormous power! (to Data) How does the legend describe the end of the Tkon Empire?
 Could this planet have escaped that?
 (to Riker) We'll have to look it over, Number One. Stand by with an away team.
 (considers it) That's a complication. We may have to ask them to join us in this.
 We were ordered to learn what we can about them. Do you know of a better way than that?
 Captain's log, supplemental. In orbit of the mysterious planet Gamma Tauri IV in the Delphi Ardu star system, whose unexplained forcefield has seized us with a power almost beyond imagination. If...
 (continuing) ... there is a solution to this, it almost certainly will involve cooperation from the Ferengi... a life form which seems as unknown and mysterious as the planet we orbit.
 Understood, Lieutenant. Open hailing frequencies.
 Ferengi vessel from Enterprise, this is Captain Picard. Come in.
 DaiMon Tarr, regarding your surrender to us, the facts are somewhat different...
 Agreed, DaiMon. May this may be a far more productive relationship.
 It... acknowledges your interest in profit, DaiMon Taar. Is that an incorrect assumption?
 We did not attack. We gave chase in order to recover a Federation-owned energy device which...
 On the contrary, Gamma Tauri IV is recognized by all civilized members of...
 All I am trying to say is you have taken a device clearly not your own from...
 Certainly not. And I have no wish to argue issues of territory or property, when our mutual problem remains. Like it or not... (firm) We are both trapped by the power draining forcefield of this planet.
 Might I propose a swap?
 An exchange, a trade...
 We will give you what we know about the planet, and in trade, you will give us your information.
 We must trust each other, Taar.
 Then may I propose we both cooperate in a joint examination of the planet surface?
 The profit, DaiMon Tarr, lies in saving all our lives.
 Understood. (onward) If you care to join us, we have a well-proven transporter device which...
 Excellent. We will transmit that information shortly. Enterprise out.
 I'll log that as "promising," at least.
 (nods) Take him. And be careful, Number One.
 Captain's log, supplemental. It is now six hours since our away team beamed down to the planet surface. On the Enterprise...
 (continuing) ... our condition is rapidly worsening. Ordinarily, with reserve power alone, we could maintain life support for several months. But the force holding us...
 (continuing) ... has closed down all engines and is draining our reserve power too... Equally impossible, our oxygen level is also dropping.
 How far down is it likely to go?
 (shivers) Feels like that right now.
 (shakes head) I've diverted... all reserve... power there. They'll... last longest. (looks around) Is there anything else we can do, Doctor?
 (continuing) Where is... your son Wesley?
 You shouldn't have.
 He has the... right to meet... death awake.
 I said... rubbish!
 I commend your performance, Number One.
 (smiles) Make it so.
 Captain's log, stardate 41249.3. We have orbited the two major planets of the Beta Renner system taking aboard delegates from those two worlds. Since achieving space flight, their major life forms, the Anticans and the Selay...
 (continuing) ... have become deadly enemies. But both have also applied for admission into our Federation. We are to deliver these delegates to this sector's neutral Conference Planet called "Parliament" in the hope their dispute can be resolved.
 I am Captain Picard. We hope to make this journey pleasant and comfortable. Arranging that will be my first officer, Commander Riker.
 Only because their world was the first on our heading to Parliament.
 About one hundred meters apart. Is that all right?
 Even Parliament's peacemakers may find this case difficult.
 (to Riker) Do you understand the basis of all that nonsense between them?
 Oh? Well, yes, but these life forms feel such passionate hatred over differences in customs, God concepts, and even strangely enough, economic systems...
 On screen.
 (eyes viewer; then) Change course for a close sensor pass... we'll then increase warp speed to reach Parliament on schedule.
 (to Data) Life form reading?
 Begin the pass.
 Any readings indicating matter there?
 Could your VISOR device have malfunctioned?
 Constantly interacting on each other?
 Obviously, you seem to feel it should be inspected more closely.
 Ah. I love a mystery, Mister Data, but this one has to wait until we deliver the delegates to their peace conference on Parliament.
 Doctor Crusher?
 What was the diagnosis?
 When it concerns a bridge officer, I expect a better explanation, Doctor.
 (still puzzled, but:) Take Science Station Two, Doctor.
 Doctor, are you all right?
 Do you want someone to accompany you?
 Counselor, what's happening to my people?
 Mister Data, this ship is less than a year out of spacedock. What are the chances of all this occurring?
 So what the hell is going on here?
 ... I don't understand it, Gentlemen. I need information. You're telling me there is no explanation for any of these malfunctions?
 That was not the question, Number One. What caused the malfunctions?
 Yes, Mister Singh?
 Have you spoken with Chief Engineer Argyle about the problem?
 I am not satisfied with that. (to the others) I want explanations of this by the time we get to Parliament.
 By the time we get to Parliament, Mr. Singh.
 Picard to Engineering. What is our problem?
 State of the art vessel? Hah. Commander Data, signal Parliament that we will be delayed. We will send the new arrival time as soon as determined.
 Your theories on the sudden vulnerability of these systems, gentlemen?
 (firmly) Gentlemen. The question now is, who. I can't believe it's one of our people.
 Can any of you suggest another solution?
 A private consulting investigator who solves crimes.
 In the world of fact, it is, Data. However in literature, criminal detection becomes a fascinating exercise. (a glance to Riker) The immortal Sherlock Holmes would have an interesting view of our mystery, I believe.
 Picard.
 Captain's log, stardate 41249.4. Assistant Chief Engineer Singh has been found dead in the Engine Room Office, cause unknown. We continue to run on impulse power.
 (to Beverly) I want the autopsy as soon as possible, Doctor.
 First, let's find out how he died. Doctor?
 (to Riker) It could be... a word you're not to use... (leans in; low voice) ...murder. Status of investigation?
 Well done. Warp engines ready. (to conn) On previous heading, warp factor six.
 Why didn't you report it?
 (beat; his expression still saying "nonsense") Your hypnotism revealed another form of duality?
 Data, let's proceed without the pipe.
 (beat, considering; then:) Yes. Very unlikely.
 What are you suggesting?
 Report.
 I'm fine. (beat) Everything is fine now.
 Why the drop to impulse power, Lieutenant?
 Malfunctioning? You're wrong -- Look again.
 In that case, make our heading two-nine-five mark three-seven.
 You have a problem with that heading, Lieutenant?
 That is what I've ordered.
 The energy "cloud," Commander -- I believe it important to have another look at it.
 I believe a very important scientific discovery awaits us on this heading.
 We must go back to learn more. (to Troi; thin smile) Counselor... do you believe a ship captain should explain every order?
 Yes?
 Oh? (nods) I'll be glad to do that when I'm free.
 Why? (to Riker) What can I do for you, Number One?
 (thin smile) Same question. Why?
 I consider it equally possible that you two and the counselor are overworked, and possibly suffering hallucinations. (to Beverly) This is an order... you're to arrange medical and psychiatric exams of both yourself and them. Doctor, you realize you're all acting strangely?
 (interrupting; hard) What's happened to your mind, Doctor? The search for knowledge is always our primary mission. (stands) I'm sorry but I'm too busy for this kind of nonsense. Must I call security to force you to report to Sickbay?
 Come.
 What do you want?
 He is here.
 (nods) And more.
 And elates us. We wish you could understand the glorious adventures ahead.
 Soon we'll both be home.
 (smiles) They are already underway.
 I have an announcement for the entire bridge.
 As many of you suspected... (indicating "cloud" image) ... when our ship passed through the edge of this, it accidentally carried off a sentient being... one much like these energy patterns we're seeing here.
 A frightening experience for any intelligent being. As if a great claw reached down and scooped up any of you from your home world. Drawn into the energy pathways of this vessel... (to Worf) ... it found its way to you, Worf, frantic at being carried from its home. Recognizing you as sentient beings, it pleaded for help.
 ... but in ways you could not understand... going desperately from one to another of you... then discovering the computer intelligence in the ship's memory circuits. (nods) Simplistic intelligence, but it furnished a way to slow this Enterprise thing that had captured it. (toward Riker) And it very much regrets the accidental death of Engineer Singh during this...
 (that smile again) By the time we combined...
 ... We had learned much about each other... our passion for exploration... for the unknown. We found we had similar dreams... and it offered your captain a way to realize them beyond any human expectation.
 (ignoring Riker) Isn't there?
 (nods) The transporter need not pattern your captain back into matter... we'll beam energy only...
 (ecstatic) ... and we will become... (pleased look) ... a combined energy pattern of that life form.
 A resignation from this command and from Starfleet has been appropriately recorded...
 Oh? Under what Fleet regulation? Does this resignation threaten the ship and its company in any way?
 What the devil am I doing here?!
 (to Riker) What's happening to me, Number One? I was ready to beam away... somewhere... I remember talk of an... an entity? But all that seems so vague...
 (interrupting) Data, what nonsense are you talking now? Is it still "Sherlock Holmes?"
 (beginning to EXIT) Well, at least get rid of that damned pipe. It smells.
 Riker, with these "peace" delegates and all, I do need some rest. Take charge, Number One.
 Captain's log, stardate 41255.6. After delivering a party of Earth colonists to the Strnad solar system and providing...
 (continuing) ... them with all their basic necessities, we have discovered another Class M planet in the adjoining Rubicun star system.
 bridge crew, all examining the planet, as:
 (continuing) We are now in orbit there, having determined it to be inhabited as well as unusually lovely. It is...
 (continuing) ... a pastoral world, which also shows evidence of learning and civilization. My first officer has taken an away team down to make contact and they are in the process of returning to the ship.
 Riker has sounded very enthused in his reports.
 (smiles to Beverly) You've been talking about it for days now... Shore leave for the crew.
 Is it as good as your reports, Number One?
 (smile) But even the happiest report has its negatives. Let's start with them.
 I take it you find no "glitch" at all in this planet, however.
 Of course... (turns) Wesley, if we go, you will join the away team to evaluate this world as a place for young people to relax.
 If all scans and observations confirm the reports... (nods) ... certainly I'll approve it. (beat) Let's hope it is not too good to be true.
 We are in orbit of a planet designated Rubicun Three... and have found it to be the home of a life form who call themselves the Edo.
 "What" is, Commander?
 Center Main Viewer on that area.
 (to Data; continuing) I need more, Commander.
 Hailing frequencies? Any reply?
 Have a real look at it, Geordi!
 Data, what the hell is it?
 Go ahead, La Forge. What can you make out?
 Anything else?
 (to Geordi) Why a tiny swirl of light, Lieutenant? Could you make out anything else?
 Why has everything become a something, or a whatever?
 I am Captain Picard, commanding this Federation starship...
 (toward LIGHT SWIRL) We have sent down what we call an away team to make peaceful contact with...
 No... we are merely visiting here...
 We found that world uninhabited. The life forms we left there... (carefully choosing his words) ... had sought the challenge... (shrugs) ... at least that's the basic reason... had sought the challenge of creating a new lifestyle, a new society there. (beat; explaining) All life on our world is driven to... to protect its own form by re-seeding itself as... as widely as possible.
 (hesitates, then) If there... is any way of our learning more about whatever is out there, Data...
 Condition?
 I believe this is some form of information exchange with whatever is over there. At least, I hope that's it.
 Something is blocking communication both...
 Captain to Riker, stand by. (to Beverly) Signs of consciousness?
 Take him to Sickbay; call me the instant he's awake. (to Geordi) Anything new on that... that thing out there?
 Captain to first officer. I'm beaming down.
 Captain's log, supplemental. We have encountered a strange vessel-like object, one with frightening power, which appears to exist partly in another dimension. On the world below...
 (continuing) ... what began as a shore leave opportunity among delightful inhabitants of a lovely Earthlike planet... has led incredibly to a death sentence...
 (continuing) ... a death sentence proclaimed against... one of our crew members for what our world considers a petty, non-criminal infraction. How can I allow a crew member to die for that? (MORE)
 How does the Prime Directive apply to this case? Indeed if we do save our crewmember, how will the frightening object up here react to that?
 Care to comment privately how you read any of this...
 Wesley Crusher -- where is he?
 We do.
 They haven't always, but they do now.
 No... not any longer, that is.
 Unfortunately, yes. But since then...
 Can we please get to the facts concerning our crewmember? (MORE)
 (waits; gets no answer) Yes, some people then felt it was necessary. But we've learned how to detect the seeds of criminal behavior... Capital punishment is no longer justified in our world as a deterrent.
 Unfortunately, we have a law ourselves known as the Prime Directive...
 Is the boy in the slightest danger from you right now?
 Then, I have another question now, please. While orbiting... while circling high above your world as we do... we encountered a strange object, a "vessel" perhaps? Do you know of such a thing? It was... well, you could say not entirely real, at least not completely what you might call solid...
 God?
 Exactly... exactly how would you describe "God?"
 Picard here.
 What condition? Can he talk?
 Stand by; Picard out. (to Troi) I'd rather explain about her son to her personally. (to Rivan and Liator) You promise Wesley Crusher will be safe until sundown?
 Then, will one of you return with me to our vessel?
 No, that's not it. I want you to... identify something for me, if you can. (touches insignia) Captain to Transporter Room. Stand by for three to beam up...
 Transporter Room, energize.
 (interrupting; firmly) In a moment, Doctor...
 (icily) Exactly, Doctor, in a moment. (to Rivan; more gently) You were about to say... ?
 (troubled smile) It's not that simple.
 (nods) And something else that's up here circling your world too. It's very important to us... perhaps to you... to know what it is.
 I'm sorry, Rivan, but this was necessary. Do you know what that is?
 Is it "God?"
 (continuing) Now, it's very important you answer something. How do you recognize what it is?
 Can you speak to it... Does it speak to you?
 Picard to Transporter Room, urgent!
 One to beam down to away team location. Hurry!
 Engage, Transporter Room, urgent! Engag...
 He is being held safely, until sundown...
 You saw what that thing was about to do. I have a ship, an entire crew to consider...
 (quietly) But I am.
 (interrupting) You're saying they. It is a vessel of some sort...
 They know... ?
 (interrupting) What kind of vessel?
 Data, don't babble!
 Please "organize" it into brief answers to my questions. Do they accept our presence at this planet?
 (waits) Please feel free to volunteer any important information, however.
 To judge what kind of life forms we are?
 Do they... know of our Prime Directive?
 And, in your opinion, if we violated the Prime Directive.. ?
 (to Data) Continue.
 Captain's log, stardate 41255.9. Whatever the object or vessel in orbit with us, it hangs there like a "nemesis". It is one thing to communicate with something mysterious...
 (continuing) ... but it is quite another to be silently observed by it. I am concerned whether it understands the same concept of reason that we do?
 Let's talk some more, Data.
 Any. My apologies for saying you babbled.
 (nods) Barely in time.
 There was no choice but to learn... (indicates mystery object) ... what we could about that thing from her.
 (nods) But I'm sorry I had to. She was so frightened.
 You have a facility for seeing things not in the way we do, but as they truly are.
 (continuing) I need help, my friend. I cannot let Wesley or any member of this vessel be sacrificed this way. The Prime Directive does not really intend that.
 Exactly. How do I explain not obeying the laws down there, not permitting young Crusher's execution? Does that endanger this ship and over a thousand other lives?
 (snaps) I refuse to let arithmetic decide questions like that!
 Did you learn anything of the relationship between the Edo and that? Why are they so certain it is "God?"
 Then, in their earlier flesh and blood existence they could have once shared our kind of values.
 Why would advanced things like that feel obliged to protect the Edo?
 You now request permission to beam down -- permission granted. (stands) You can accompany me while I try to resolve this. (starts; then stops and turns) And you should know that whatever the cost, I will not allow them to execute your son.
 (to Data) Take command, Data.
 No, no, we're not "Gods." (small smile) Your own idea of that is much better for you at this time...
 No. (turning to Liator and Mediators) But I'd like to prevent it in a way you can understand...
 (nods) Which has to do with another law I must obey. All of us are sworn not to interfere with other life in the galaxy. I am caught between the two. If I save this young man, I break that law...
 (nods) I may suffer almost as much. Starfleet takes our Prime Directive very seriously...
 (to the others) Stand ready to beam out.
 The question of justice has concerned me a good deal lately. Pained me. Until now, Liator. I realize now that there can be no justice...
 (back to Liator) ... no justice so long as laws are absolute. Life itself is an exercise in exceptions.
 (touches insignia) Six to beam up.
 Hailing frequencies open.
 To the object sharing this orbit... we will remove the human colonists from the adjoining solar system if signaled to do so. Or we'll proceed on our mission, if signaled to do that. Please tell us...
 (beat) I was hoping for more.
 (beat) I was hoping we'd learn more about it. But since we can't... (looks to Riker) Take us out of here, Number One.
 Captain's log, stardate 41723.9. In response to a Starfleet order we are in the Xendi Sabu star system having rendezvoused with a Ferengi vessel which has requested a meeting. Although...
 (continuing) ... we arrived here and made appropriate signals to the Ferengi three days ago, they have so far responded only with the message: "Stand by, Enterprise."
 He's in some physical discomfort, presses his knuckles to his temple, GROANS. We HEAR a CHIME from his door.
 Come!
 Yes, Doctor. I've been feeling... odd, lately. Fatigued. And now I've got a headache.
 Certainly you know what a "headache" is, Doctor.
 The reason for it seems fairly obvious. What are these Ferengi up to? "Stand by, Enterprise." Stand by for what?
 I can't either. But they could be baiting some kind of trap...
 Doctor, all I've got is...
 On my way, Number One. (CROSSING to door) Sorry, Doctor. Duty calls.
 Have they given any hint what they've been waiting for?
 Me? Why me? I've never heard of him.
 Consider ourselves reminded. (to Tasha) Open hailing frequencies.
 Ferengi vessel! This is Captain Jean-Luc Picard of the Enterprise. We are transmitting visually.
 Do we know each other?
 I'm afraid you have the advantage. Is this... Bok?
 What problem is that, DaiMon Bok?
 (toward Viewscreen) I appreciate your offer, DaiMon Bok, and ask you to be our guests.
 One hour, Bok. End transmission.
 (turns to Troi) They agreed a bit too easily.
 (continuing; nods back) Then, in one hour we'll know why.
 Are you accustomed to always getting your way, Doctor?
 A lot of effort for something as simple as a headache.
 And so why do I have a headache, Doctor?
 What's that?
 (surprised) The pain's gone.
 Carry on. (to Wesley) Answer the first officer's question.
 (fighting it off) Nothing, just... a mild headache. (to Wesley) The correct procedure, Ensign, would have been to signal your finding to the bridge immediately.
 Time? Oh, for the Ferengi to beam over. (to Riker) Do you see any problems connected with this old starship coming in?
 Concur. (to bridge) Stand by! (to Tasha) Let's bring them on visually.
 Enterprise to Ferengi vessel. We are standing by to receive you.
 Question... where shall we receive you?
 Data? What do you read?
 We welcome you in peace to the Enterprise, DaiMon Bok.
 (nods to acknowledge) This is my first officer, Commander Riker... (Bok nods) And Counselor Troi. Second Officer Data; Lieutenant La Forge; security officers, Lieutenant Yar and Lieutenant Worf; Ensign Crusher.
 It... he is not for sale. Commander Data is...is...
 (alert) One of our starships under your control?
 Who?
 I'm sorry, I'm afraid I do not. Data?
 (turns to Bok) My sincere regrets, Bok, but that ship did not identify itself. It simply attacked; we defended ourselves...
 (nods to Tasha) Main Viewer.
 For what purpose? What is this all...
 (overlapping) No... no, I'm fine...
 I'm all right now; I'm fine. (to Bok; indicating viewer) What is this all about?
 (to Geordi) Enlarge please, La Forge.
 It... it is the Stargazer. My old ship, but how... where did you find it?
 Captain's log, stardate 41724.1. Bok and his officers have returned to their vessel, inviting us now to officially take possession of the Stargazer. They will stand by while completing the downloading of its log to us.
 Perhaps... it hit with more impact.
 Are you sure it wasn't one of my thoughts? At that moment, I was remembering being at the helm of the Stargazer, a maneuver being made. We were hit... (beat; puzzled) Something's burning... I smell smoke! (pushing at scanner) Don't you smell it?
 Ah... no, of course. It was... the memory I was calling up. (finds a smile for Beverly) Sorry.
 (smiling again) Well, it was strong, whatever it was. (looks up at Riker) Ready, Number One.
 We were traveling at warp two through the Maxia Zeta star system when an unidentified starship suddenly appeared and fired on us! From close range.
 It must've been lying in a deep moon crater nearby. The first attack damaged our shields, and in the confusion it hit us a second time.
 No name, no reason... (looks up sharply) Can you identify them, Vigo? Our shields are failing; if they come in again... ?
 Ah... my weapons officer on the Stargazer. (weak smile) I was getting caught up in this.
 I improvised. With the other ship coming in for the kill... (describes with his hands) ... I ordered a sensor bearing, and when it went into its return arc...
 What any good helmsman could have done. I dropped into high warp... (with his hands) ... then stopped right off the target vessel's bow... (slaps hands together) ... and fired everything I had.
 And our attacker fired on the wrong one.
 A "save our skins" maneuver. The Stargazer was on fire, finished. We had to abandon ship, and limp through space in shuttlecraft for weeks before being picked up. (beat) I haven't thought about it in years...
 (to Riker) I want to go over to her.
 Yes, Commander
 I will that, Number One. (to Chief) Energize!
 Hello, old friend...
 What do you find, Data?
 Fine, Doctor. (to Tasha) Lieutenant Yar, run a structural analysis on the Stargazer for impulse tow. (to Data) Data, download all computers to the Enterprise and file... (to all) I'm going to my old cabin.
 DAMNNNN!
 (continuing) OHHHH!
 Yes, but... my things here...
 (distant) Strange, Number One. Like visiting the house you grew up in, but no one's home, except the phantoms of the past...
 Not as much as this damn headache, Counselor. Take over, Number One.
 What does this mean?
 Don't you know it is, Number One?
 ... and I admit I must have mistaken their subspace antenna for a weapons cluster. Unfortunately, I fired our main phasers...
 (continuing) ... and our direct hit destroyed the unknown vessel instantly.
 Thank you, Will. (shakes head) I never made that log entry, of course. But it still creates a duty for you to perform.
 ... and another full day for their answer to return. I'd like the truth on this by then.
 Why shouldn't they? Better safe than sorry with the Ferengi now making friendship overtures.
 Damn! (nods) I'll call the doctor again.
 Once again...
 This is a confession, given by me, Jean-Luc Picard, commanding USS Stargazer, in the hopes that my belated honesty will be taken into account by Starfleet when judging...
 Who the hell is it?!
 More like dying, Doctor. What's wrong with me?!
 Why do doctors always state the obvious like it's a revelation?
 Aghhh! My head!
 No!
 It hasn't been! But it is getting worse, Doctor...
 I got the damn headache before I even knew my old ship still existed... (pain easing) But maybe you're partly right...
 (pain again) What I need now is a friend...
 (eyes CLOSE) The Stargazer was an exploration vessel. The fight at Maxia was not my first action, but it was the first time I ever killed anyone.
 Didn't I? I don't know anymore... I just don't know.
 (ignores her) The last three nights, I... hear voices. I'm standing on the bridge, fire all around me... the klaxons, smoke, and I give the order... (amazed) And now the Stargazer is really here! (back to her) And that log... Am I going crazy? How do I know if I was in my right mind at Maxia? How do I know if I'm in my right mind now?
 What was... that?
 (already working) Yes... sleep... I need sl...
 (normal volume) Damage report!
 Sensor bearing on hostile ship!
 Ready phasers, and lock! (MOVES ACROSS room) Stand by for warp nine, heading seven, seven mark twenty... (another room position) And ENGAGE!
 Steady. NOW reverse and stop! (goes for it) Phasers FIRE! Torpedoes AWAY!
 Fire!
 FIRE!!
 A little sleep, thanks to the doctor, works wonders. Any report on the logs?
 (amused) I thought I was captain of this starship, Doctor.
 Thank you for your confirmation of that. (includes the others) But now, except for Commander Riker, I want you all back at your stations... (emphatic) Is that clear?
 (interrupting) I mean you too, Doctor. I have business with Riker.
 Release the Stargazer from the tractor beam, Number One.
 The tractor beam.
 (interrupting) No. Her inertia will carry the Stargazer along on this heading with us. Or did you sleep through the Academy lecture on conserving tractor beam power?
 (swivels, stands) What is happening?
 What are you doing?
 (throbbing pain) AGHHH-H-H!!
 I have no idea what you're talking about...
 Your son?
 The ship... ? The... the Ferengi ship that attacked me... (looks around) ... or is it about to attack me?
 OHHHHH... ! OHHHHH... !
 You cannot... control me like...
 (not understanding) Do not attack again! We are on a peaceful...
 Give your identity! You force us to defend ourselves! (turning; shouting) Phasers full up! Arm torpedoes! Why aren't shields at full power... ?
 Damn, I said... (flicking switches) ... put fusion generators on surge control. (to another panel) You're moving too slowly. Arm the torpedoes, man!
 (continuing) Vigo! Get a fire control party up here!
 Weapons report!
 Who are they? Identify them!
 Ready phasers!
 Is that you, Vigo?
 Stand by for warp... (inner conflict) Who are you?!
 Phaser... (glances back) Yes, a sphere... Bok used it...
 (fumbles in pocket) Phaser... destroy the sphere.
 Enterprise, lock on. Beam me home, Riker.
 (interrupting) Doctor Crusher, this is the Captain.
 Additional information. The number of colonists at the site is five hundred-four - including thirty-eight children.
 at the Aft Station. GEORDI has the Conn, DATA on Ops. TASHA at Tactical. / 
 So far nothing more than the initial message. Explosion - cause unknown - many injured. Are you prepared, Doctor?
 Not now, damn it, "Q"... (to Helm) Emergency full stop!
 (waits, then) If this is "Q" I'm addressing, our vessel and crew are on a mission of rescue where a group of badly injured...
 (sarcastically) However intriguing we may find that to be, we are now in the midst of an urgent journey. Once we have completed that...
 "Q", STOP THIS! / 
 Stop this and we agree to talk for a moment!
 You are not a Starfleet admiral, "Q"... / 
 (interrupting) No, Lieutenant Worf... !
 You'll make no move against him unless I order it.
 "Q", you said you had the / realization of "some impossible dreams" to offer us. Once this rescue is complete, I'll listen seriously to whatever proposal you wish to make and then, subject to it being acceptable...
 "Q", right now humans may be / dying because you...
 (beat) Why? On our first meeting, "Q", you seized my vessel, condemned all humans as savages and on that charge, you tried us in a post-atomic twenty-first century court of horrors where you attacked my people... then you again seized my vessel...
 (without pause, ignoring this) ... and then proceeded to interfere with our Farpoint mission, threatening to convict us as ignorant savages if, in dealing with complex and powerful life-forms, we made the slightest error... and when you failed even there...
 Turbolift Control, do you read? This is the captain.
 (continuing) Engineering, this is the bridge.
 (continuing) Security -- this is the Captain.
 (continuing) Computer? (waits) Computer on!
 (continuing) Captain's log...
 (continuing) Damn... I can't even make a log entry.
 What... what are you doing here?
 You're what?!
 Gone?
 I'm sorry...
 Lieutenant...Tasha... it's all right...
 Don't worry. There's a new ship's standing order. (smiles) When in a penalty box, some tears are permitted.
 A marshal of France? Ridiculous!
 But who proved himself a resourceful opponent when he defeated you at Farpoint.
 So, you're taking on Riker this time. (smiles) Excellent! He'll defeat you just as I did!
 Against your staying out of humanity's path... forever! Done?
 "Q", listen to me. You seem to / have some need of humans...
 Whichever it is, why try to solve it through this confrontation with us? Why not a simple direct explanation, a statement of what you seek? Why these games?
 Indeed he did, "Q". But careful you don't depend too much on any single viewpoint he...
 (interrupts) "All the galaxy?" "All the world's a stage... "
 And so you say, how we respond to a game tells you more about us than our real life, a "tale told by an idiot." (still amused) Interesting, "Q".
 No. I know Hamlet. And what he said with irony I prefer to say with conviction. (quoting) "What a piece of work is man! How noble in reason! How infinite in faculty. In form, in moving, how express and admirable. In action, how like an angel. In apprehension, how like a god... "
 I see us one day becoming that, "Q". Is that what concerns you? / 
 Take the Conn, Lieutenant.
 Engineering -- this is the bridge.
 Are all systems back on line?
 We never did. "Q" suspended time.
 Animal things?
 Understood, Counselor, but Will is almost certainly safe... (troubled) ... at least "safe" in a physical sense. "Q" has an interest in him... in fact, "Q"'s entire visit has something to do with our first officer.
 I wish I knew. "Q" became interested in him at Farpoint. (shakes head) I've no idea what it means. (to the others) Meanwhile, we must proceed with our rescue mission...
 Where is "Q"? If you have any answer to this, Number One...
 Riker, you... you did that?!
 That grid, their wounds... only the "Q" could do that...
 Captain's log, stardate 41591.4. Twelve minutes out from Quadra Sigma III where the survivors of an underground disaster desperately need our help. Aboard the Enterprise...
 (continuing) ... First Officer William T. Riker needs help nearly as badly. But this is a subject so far out of my experience... out of any human's experience.
 Will, how the hell do I advise you what to do?!
 (snaps) Don't joke with me! What the "Q" has offered you has got to / be close to "immortality," Will. They're not lying about controlling space and time; we've seen it in what they can do. But...
 Of all things, that troubles me most, Will. Are you strong enough to refuse to use that power?
 No matter how tempted? No matter how difficult "Q" makes it?
 As soon as we are secure from the rescue operation, we'll meet in the Conference Room.
 Counselor?
 We'll confer on the bridge here if no one...
 (interrupting) Correction, Number One; knowing the decision you face, I've permitted you this gathering.
 Perhaps we're all remembering the old saying... "power corrupts... "
 And have you noticed that you and I are now on a first-name basis?
 (continuing) Will, something has happened to you already...
 Let's keep in mind that particular danger was invented by "Q".
 Number One, we've learned that the "Q" power does not admire us... "Q" has muddled your mind somehow.
 (moving to "Q") Let us do no such damned thing! (pulls at "Q"'s robes) What is this need of yours for costumes? Have you no identity of your own?
 You come in search of what humanity is!
 (indicates "Q" to Riker) Can't you see it, Number One? He's nothing but a flim-flam man! That's what he's been since his first appearance at Farpoint!
 (alerted) "Obstruct him?" Then it's not yet certain? He's not yet committed?
 (beat) In fact... I authorize and support that idea, Riker. (to the crew) And please cooperate with him, if you wish.
 I'm quite certain, Counselor. (to Riker) By all means, demonstrate your gifts of affection.
 Quite right, you should!
 It's all over "Q". You have no further business here.
 But only after you've paid off your wager, "Q".
 I'm sure your fellow "Q" remember you agreed to never trouble our species again. Just as they're aware you've failed to tempt a human to join you. So, "Q", I strongly suspect you have some explaining of your own to do...
 Extraordinary! "Q" sought to discover the distinguishing characteristic of humanity and never learned what Coleridge said: "It must be the possession of a soul within us that makes the difference."
 Perhaps we'll discover some day that time and space are simpler than the human equation. (toward Riker) No coordinates laid in, Number One?
 (nods) Engage!
 Captain's log, stardate 41309.5. We are in orbit around Persephone V where I have been sent to confer with Admiral Mark Jameson in regard to an extraordinary situation....
 Starfleet received this subspace transmission two days ago, Admiral.
 On screen and relay to the admiral, Mister Data.
 Starfleet doesn't understand how or why this situation developed. Mordan IV has finally gained peace after decades of civil war --
 Yes, sir. Karnas was largely responsible for the planet's unification and peace. Why should he suddenly be unable to deal with rebellious factions?
 (nods) I'm detailed to take you to Mordan IV as soon as you can be ready, Admiral.
 Received and acknowledged, sir. Picard out.
 (rising) Well, Number One. Why don't we go and welcome the admiral aboard?
 Your hero, Number One?
 (nods) I've heard all the legends about him, too. Not only the Falcon's missions and the Mordan rescue, but the Gettysburg's explorations, his command of the old Pegasus in the Klingon conflicts....
 Welcome aboard, Admiral. (indicating Riker) My executive officer, Commander William Riker.
 Is this the place to be discussing them, sir?
 Yes, sir.
 Yes, sir. Of course.
 Put it on the screen, Mister Data.
 I am Captain Picard, in command of the Enterprise.
 (nods toward Jameson) He is here, beside my first officer. Do you wish to speak to him now?
 (to Troi) Counselor?
 Perhaps he knows more about the terrorists than he is willing to admit.
 He is on his way, Doctor.
 Just a routine medical checkup. Ship's regulations.
 All right. Karnas has a problem he feels you can handle. What can the terrorists want that Karnas can't or won't give them?
 Karnas worked and fought for years to achieve peace.
 (it's routine) Excellent, Doctor --
 He is eighty years old, Doctor. For some, the memory begins to fail....
 I'd expect that observation from Counselor Troi, but -- (on her sharp look) I respect your opinion, Doctor. And I'll want you on the bridge for the next day or so. The admiral has to remain in the best of health for these negotiations. He might require your services.
 Captain's personal log... I am puzzled and somewhat concerned by the dating error Admiral Jameson made on his medical records.
 (rises, turns to Jameson) Admiral, we're approaching the Idini Star Cluster. Would you like to take the Conn as we make transit?
 Well, Admiral. Quite a little surprise you've pulled on us.
 Admiral... you only have the Conn temporarily.
 The admiral displayed a remarkable improvement out there, wouldn't you say?
 Then how do you account for it?
 I'd like you to look into it, Doctor. Thoroughly.
 Specifics, Doctor.
 Give me what you have now.
 You said there is no cure for Iverson's.
 Get me some answers, Doctor. As soon as possible.
 There are some questions I have to ask the admiral, Mrs. Jameson.
 (recovers himself) Admiral -- in addition to your rank, you are a particularly valuable commodity just now. Starfleet has a right to some answers.
 I've heard that story, too. It's a myth.
 (studies him) Obviously it works rapidly. How does it work?
 You took the whole dose.
 The only question I have, Admiral, is why you felt it necessary to be young to negotiate the hostage release. Surely Karnas requested you because of your age and experience.
 I'll be on the bridge, Admiral, if you wish to talk further.
 A moment, Mister Data. Admiral, this is Picard. May I know the purpose of this communication?
 You said he was a proud man... probably sensitive about his failure to deal with the situation. Is it wise to press him on this?
 Then I suggest a secured channel, Admiral.
 Ready for exactly what, Admiral?
 What happened in your communication to bring you to that conclusion? It seems a big jump....
 I agree the most important thing is saving the lives of the hostages...
 Wouldn't that be a little too obvious, Admiral?
 An overt rescue attempt could push Karnas into killing the hostages outright.
 Then what does he want?
 Therefore you see an armed raid as our only option.
 I would point out no one else has heard or considered Karnas's demands but you, Admiral. The Federation might take a different view of them if they knew what they were.
 Is Jameson physically able to lead an away mission, Doctor?
 What about his mind?
 Counselor?
 More of a young man's attitude, I'd say. Aggressive... going right for the throat of a situation instead of considering the alternatives.
 I couldn't sleep either.
 Maybe in this case rethinking?
 (shrugs it away, then:) Why is this mission so important to you? Why did you risk your life so you could lead it personally?
 Noble sentiment -- but too easy an answer. You've been here before. You negotiated a release of hostages with Karnas before. Why is it now your answer is an armed raid?
 (continuing) It's my away team you're going to send in. There's something you're not telling me, and I have a right to know what it is.
 That's the official record.
 Are you saying that's not the truth?
 You did what?
 That decision plunged them into forty years of civil war.
 Karnas could have worked for peace all those years instead of continuing the war. It's not all on your head, Admiral.
 Revenge. That's why he demanded you when he found out you were still alive.
 Belay that.
 (continuing) Admiral, the correct place for you is on the bridge...
 The Admiral is correct, Number One. He has that right. But I'm the captain of this ship, and I have it, too. You have command of the Enterprise, Commander Riker. (to the Chief) Energize.
 I've no doubt you're right, Mister Data. However, forty-five years ago, I'm sure it linked in with the tunnels Admiral Jameson remembers.
 Reset phasers to stun.
 (drily) Thank you, Mister Data. I have heard the sound before.
 (tabs communicator) Enterprise, this is Picard. Five to beam up -- now!
 How badly is he hurt?
 (to Tasha) Call Doctor Crusher here immediately.
 Do you have any answers, Doctor?
 (sighs) You're saying the overdose of the drug he took is working too well.
 When will it stop?
 Sickbay. "Not good" is a galactic understatement.
 This is Picard. I am sorry to inform you that the admiral is critically ill, Karnas.
 Picard.
 On my way.
 What is it?
 (to companel) Picard here. What is it, Number One?
 It's certain death for you, Admiral.
 (beat, then:) Number One, inform Karnas we'll be beaming down in less than five minutes.
 You have your orders, Number One.
 Yes. Exactly why I have to go, Will. As a Starfleet captain, I have negotiating powers. (to Transporter Chief) Energize.
 This is Admiral Mark Jameson.
 Admiral!
 He is the admiral. Before we left on this mission, he administered an overdose of an alien de-aging drug to himself. He wanted to face you with strength again... on even terms. This is what the drug has done to him.
 As I understand the facts, Karnas, you were the one who demanded weapons to avenge your father's death.
 (nods quickly) Do it.
 Karnas, I've asked Doctor Crusher to bring down the visual records we've made of Admiral Jameson's deterioration. Will you look at them?
 Only a few moments.
 (continuing) You saw Admiral Jameson when he was on board en route to Mordan?
 You recognized him?
 And this is the man you saw.
 Never again, Karnas.
 Once he took the compound ... there was no way to stop it.
 You'll have to deal with me, Karnas. Whatever you wanted from Jameson isn't possible any more.
 (continuing) You wanted revenge, Karnas. You blamed your war on Jameson, and there's no doubt he had a lot to do with it. But you had the weapons, and you used them. You could have tried for negotiations for peace on your planet long ago. You chose to fight instead. How many of those forty years of war are on your head?
 (points to the boy) Then there's Jameson. He wanted to atone for what he'd done here. Forty-five years ago, he made the wrong decision, and he wanted to come here to somehow right it. He wanted to negotiate, and when that failed, he decided to fight. (MORE)
 Your men foiled that, and all he has left now is to give himself up to you. He's brought this retribution on himself.
 Doctor Crusher?
 Can you give him something for the pain?
 ... The hostages have been freed by Karnas, unharmed. (pause) Personal note. The body of Admiral Mark Jameson has been buried on Mordan, at the request of his widow and with the permission of Karnas. Log out.
 The quest for youth, Number One... so futile. Age and wisdom have their graces.
 I hope not, Number One. It would be such a waste of youth. (beat, then:) Mister La Forge, prepare to take us out of orbit. Set course for Isis III.
 with Jaradan (HA-RAH-DAN) figures and their English equivalents.
 (nodding) -- And the inverted "T" means to hold the "zee."
 Unless it's followed by three wavy lines; in which case the "zee" becomes a "bee."
 What a language.
 (burnt out) My mind's barely working.
 (shaking head) No. I want to go over it again.
 Dixon Hill.
 Earth... United States... San Francisco, California.
 (pondering it) 1941, A.D.
 File Dixon Hill, private detective.
 I don't understand --
 The uniform. Totally inappropriate. Why didn't I change?
 Uh, I lost a bet.
 Halloween?
 Captain's log, supplemental. I am delighted with how the Holodeck has created the fictional world of Dixon Hill...
 (continuing) ... the twentieth century detective who has been a hero of mine since childhood.
 (continuing) The illusion is flawless. The computer characters accept me as Dixon Hill, even to the extent that Jessica Bradley, a millionaire's wife from the wrong side of the tracks, wants to hire me.
 Or a lover, perhaps?
 Twenty dollars a day. Plus expenses.
 I haven't said yes yet.
 I'll take your word for it.
 (to himself, soft) Remarkable.
 (calling out) You'll have to call again. I'm just leaving. I'm not dressed properly. I'll be back.
 Memory: save current setting.
 Holodeck OFF.
 When I looked down on the street, I actually saw automobiles!
 I saw an entire city block from that window.
 I'm going to try it again, only this time I'm going to dress the part. (to Beverly) Why not come with me?
 I also want to take that historian... the twentieth century expert...
 Yes, Whalen. He probably knows more about Dixon Hill than I do.
 Invite him, Mister Data. This is, after all, a leisure activity.
 The sense of reality is incredible. When that woman kissed me, it was so --
 Real. (clears throat) The subject of this meeting is the Jaradan rendezvous. Proceed with the briefing, Number One.
 It's not necessary. Meeting adjourned.
 Captain's log, supplemental...
 (continuing) The Jaradan rendezvous is eleven hours away...
 (continuing) I am about to reenter the world of Dixon Hill, this time properly dressed. An experience like this is more enjoyable when shared, so I've invited Lit-historian Whalen to accompany me. Doctor Crusher will join us shortly...
 Ready to go to San Francisco, Mister Whalen?
 If it's anything like the last time I'm sure you won't be disappointed --
 Very impressive, gentlemen. Now... Shall we?
 Uh, she's fine... just fine.
 Say Joe, I'd like to buy a paper too, but I don't have any money.
 (reading) "Hitler on the move... Roosevelt presses Congress for British aid... DiMaggio streak reaches thirty-seven?"
 Uh, no... he's not. (pause) He's from South America.
 (somber) I should have listened to her. She told me someone was trying to kill her.
 That would be a bit hard to explain.
 What for?
 I've told you everything I know.
 Very good. I've read all this before. It's exactly as it should be.
 I've already told you that. Twice.
 (rising) Look fellows, this is no longer amusing.
 I need to get out of here.
 (rising) That's welcome news.
 (wry) It's been a pleasure, sir.
 (dryly) I get the feeling he doesn't like me.
 I'll keep it in mind.
 Thank you. For helping me.
 (thoughtful smile) Soon, my friend. But at the moment I have other duties.
 (choosing his words) She's a lady all right... and her name's Enterprise.
 I'm not sure. Sometimes it seemed too real. (to Beverly) Glad you could make it. (looks her up and down) I must say, you wear it well.
 I think it's time we got back to the Enterprise.
 (chuckling) Yes. Of course we are.
 I don't see why not.
 The Holodeck makes excellent use of a finite space.
 I'm sorry Mister Leech, but we really must be going. Call again tomorrow.
 That'll have to wait.
 I can't help you, Mister Leech. I'm afraid this game is over.
 How could this happen?
 (to computer) Exit!
 (continuing) Computer! Exit!
 (continuing) We'll try the other exit.
 Computer, this is the captain! Identify exit!
 Suggestions, Mister Data?
 I see I have no choice.
 I don't suppose so.
 He's not from this world. None of us are.
 (continuing) We come from a world of fabulous riches. A world of objects -- far greater in value than the one you seek.
 I am not Dixon Hill.
 I only look like Dixon Hill.
 Thank you, Mister Data.
 Data--
 Deep down, you all sense the truth. Deep down, you know you're not real. All of you.
 We don't have it.
 Redblock. I have the item.
 I'll explain. But first, tell Leech to back off.
 There is a price.
 Mister Whalen's life. You must help us save him.
 (passionate, to Redblock) If we can find the way of getting him to our Sickbay by fixing our computer --
 (to Redblock) That's it! The way into our world.
 Yes. Allow us to help Mister Whalen, and we'll return with the item.
 (to Data, indicating Exit) Pick him up. Get him to Sickbay.
 I'll follow you. Now go!
 I can't think of a way to thank you. You know I can't take you with me.
 (empathetic) I have to go.
 (pause, sadly) I honestly don't know. Good-bye my friend.
 As ready as I'll ever be. Open hailing frequencies.
 (into com, commandingly) This is Jean-Luc Picard, captain of the USS Enterprise. Aaaaard kraxon Leeeeesss...
 Risssssss... Trassssss.... Trasulah!
 It was a nice place to visit, but I wouldn't want to die there.
 Captain's log, stardate 41242.4. Our last assignment has taken us into the remote Omicron Theta star system, home of our android crewmember Lieutenant Commander Data. Although we are due...
 (continuing) ... at our next assignment, I have decided to increase velocity to warp eight to visit Data's home planet for a few hours in the hopes of unraveling some of the mystery of his beginnings.
 He said he wanted to be alone. Perhaps it's a bigger moment for him than we thought. (turns to Wesley) If he needs a formal invitation, Ensign, you do the honors.
 Walk!
 Strange. The cruiser that found Data reported farmland here.
 Continue on into close parking orbit.
 It usually refers to the memories.
 "Sneezing?"
 (to Riker) Assemble your away party, Commander.
 (continuing) This is an exciting moment for you, Data. I'm tempted to lead the away team down myself, except for the fact the first officer would object...
 Welcome home, Mister Data.
 (annoyed) Damn. Can anyone see why they've turned down a perfectly legitimate request to finish this investigation here?
 Then, get us there on schedule, Number One. (to Wesley; controlling self) Thank you, Wesley. I'd completely forgotten that.
 (continuing) Captain's log, Stardate 41242.45. Despite having only a few hours in which to explore Data's home planet...
 (continuing) ... we have discovered something which may explain Data's beginnings... if we can properly assemble and communicate with what we've found.
 Bringing it up here was the right thing to do, of course, Number One.
 (continuing) I was just saying, Data, that if it functions, it might answer a lot of questions for us.
 All right, all right... (stands; hesitates, then) Legitimate questions about this need not be asked apologetically. (to Data) You're uncomfortable about aspects of your duplicate, Data... we're uncomfortable, too... and none of it for any logical reason. We know that you're as "alive" as any of the rest of us. (to the others) If you find it awkward to be reminded that Data is a "machine"... you might remember that the rest of you are merely a different variety of machine... in our case, electro-chemical in nature. (MORE)
 (sits) Let's begin handling this as we would anything else.
 (snaps) My comments, Lieutenant, do not require applause!
 Let's start with you, Data.
 (nods) That human-shaped robots need not be clumsy, limited things... (turning) You certainly operate as well as we do, Data...
 Ah... yes! But the important question now may be what happened to the colonists.
 He's on his way, Doctor.
 (uncertain) Do you think so, really? (leans in; inspects) I wonder which of them was made first?
 I'm also a bit troubled by it describing you as "imperfect."
 I wonder. But the point of this is whether you and it have approximately the same capabilities.
 I see your point, Commander. My sincere apologies.
 You both have about equal physical strength and mental ability?
 (troubled) Which requires I now ask you... a very serious question. Since the two of you are closely related to each other...
 (beat; small smile) Thank you, Commander. I was certain of that.
 Captain's log, stardate 41242.5. We now have the full story of the micro-engineering achievement which produced Data... and Lore...
 (continuing) ... and of the tragedy which deprived humanity of the remarkable minds behind that. Our first clue was a child's drawing which showed a great, complex crystal shape...
 (continuing) ... confirmed by Lore's report to be an unknown kind of creature, capable of stripping all life from an entire world... insatiably ravenous for the life force found in intelligent forms like us... which Lore explains it stored in new crystal patterns... for purposes which are unknown.
 Which explains why Data could be left outside in no danger from the creature. Whatever happened to the colonists, he would be found by any Starfleet team that responded to the signal being transmitted.
 Having explored so little of just our galaxy, I find anything possible.
 The act of a Starfleet officer obeying his captain, Doctor.
 I trust him completely, Lieutenant! (then softer) But everyone should also realize you just asked a necessary and legitimate security question.
 You're certain he said he'll be right up?
 Shields up; go to Yellow Alert! Transmit friendly greetings, all languages, all frequencies.
 Did you have a direct look at it?
 Data, anything else Lore can tell us about it may be important. Can you control Lore enough to question him?
 Ensign... !
 That is quite enough, Ensign! When addressing a senior officer...
 Well, Number One?
 I asked for Commander Riker's report, "Acting Ensign" Crusher. And since it is now clear you are unable to function here within the limits of that appointment...
 (keeping voice calm) Bring photon torpedoes to ready; main phasers to ready...
 (continuing: to Riker) Go to Red Alert, please.
 (interrupting) Why didn't you say you could?
 (continuing) Affirmative! Talk to it!
 Make it so!
 Do it!
 Shut up, Wesley. (turning) Lieutenant Yar, pick a good security team, let me know what he does.
 Stay out of this, Madam...
 Granted, if you take your mother with you.
 I'm asking that you keep an eye on your son during this, Doctor.
 (to Beverly) Now that your son's safe, Doctor, report immediately to Sickbay.
 (continuing; beat; eyeing him) Data, get rid of that damned twitch! And put on a correct uniform.
 And Ensign Crusher... (as Wesley HURRIES IN) ... are you able to return to duty now?
 Then do so! Let the bridge know all is well down here.
 (nods) And we're overdue for our computer refit. (beat) Number One, have you ever considered whether Data is more human, or less human than we want?
 (beat; nods) Agreed!
 Captain's log, stardate 41636.9. As feared, our examination of the seven year overdue Federation freighter, Odin -- disabled by an asteroid collision -- revealed no survivors.
 (continuing) However, three escape pods were missing, suggesting the possibility of survivors...
 Make it so, Mister La Forge. What kind of place is this, Data?
 Starfleet was quite adamant that we maintain excellent diplomatic relations with this planet. Any other pertinent information before we reply, Mister Data? Their form of government would be a logical starting place.
 Except, let us hope, for the Odin escape pods. (then:) Since this is a female-dominated society, it might be more prudent if you made the initial contact, Counselor.
 That's their prerogative, Lieutenant. (then:) Prepare the away team, Number One.
 Angel One's position in this quadrant may become strategically vital. The hope at Starfleet is that some day this planet could become a part of the Federation.
 Energize!
 I want all departments prepared for a warp six trip to the Neutral Zone as soon as the away team completes its mission.
 Insurance. Romulan battlecruisers have been detected near one of our border posts. They've requested assistance as soon as we are available.
 Report, Mister Crusher.
 On the Enterprise, Mister Crusher, nothing "just happens." (distracted) What is that smell?
 No.
 Don't let this "just happen" again, Mister Crusher.
 Picard here.
 Is it contained?
 How contagious is it?
 Please stay with it, Doctor. Starfleet has important business for us as soon as the away team returns. I don't relish having my crew infected.
 Agreed. And keep me advised.
 Go ahead, Lieutenant.
 Have Mister La Forge break fixed orbit and initiate a search pattern.
 This is all quite unnecessary, Doctor. (suppressing the pain) I'm merely fatigued.
 Don't be ridiculous, Doctor. I've got an away team down there, in less-than-friendly territory, not to mention an appointment with the several Romulan battlecruisers...
 Is that an order?
 I guess I'm better at giving orders than taking them.
 Lieutenant La Forge -- you have command until further notice. Please make the proper entries in the ship's log.
 Picard to bridge.
 Status report, please.
 And the --
 (continuing) -- away team?
 Keep me-- (coughs) --advised. You'll have the bridge until Commander Riker returns.
 Enter.
 (coughs, groans) Same... you gave me last birthday.
 Lieutenant Worf and I... detected a similar scent when we bumped into... your son at the Holodeck.
 You are excused, Doctor.
 Enter.
 On the mend, thank you. Tell me about Angel One.
 Captain's log, stardate 41365.9. The Enterprise has been ordered to Starbase 74, in orbit around Tarsas III.
 (continuing) ... where a routine maintenance check of all systems will be made, and certain upgrades completed, including the Holodeck, with which we have had problems. I anticipate a glowing report. This ship has performed magnificently -- beyond anyone's expectations.
 Thank you, Number One. Well done, and well done all.
 Granted -- and welcome.
 (continuing) This is Commander Riker.
 No. We are very pleased with the operation of the Enterprise.
 (to the Bynars) Your reputation precedes you. I am pleased you will be improving our system.
 You have forty-eight hours, because at forty-eight plus six we have an appointment at Pelleus Five which we must keep.
 I'm sorry. Our mission can't be delayed. Can we postpone this work?
 Commander Riker and I will stay aboard, and be available should you need us.
 As I understand it, over time they've become so interconnected with the master computer on their planet that their language and thought patterns have become as near to binary as possible for organic beings.
 Well, I'm going to put my feet up, turn on my personal relaxation light and lose myself in the pages of some old novels.
 Bridge. (then:) And you, Number One? You've earned a good rest. What are you going to do with it?
 I'll be in my Ready Room.
 Everything under control, Ensign Crusher?
 Where's Commander Riker?
 No, I'll wander down and see what's he doing to occupy himself. Keep me apprised.
 Astounding.
 Sorry, Number One -- I didn't mean to interrupt.
 You picked a wonderful locale. Something I might have chosen myself.
 Incroyable! Vous etes Parisienne?
 (laughs) Oui, au fonde nous sommes tous Parisienne. The spirit of that city can always restore my soul.
 (with a look to Riker) Oh. (lightly) Have I been a topic of conversation?
 Thank you.
 (to Minuet, graciously) At the moment, it's you who are setting the tone. (then, to Riker) The sophistication of this programming is remarkable.
 The Holodeck has been able to give us woodlands and ski slopes and figures that fight and fictional characters with which we can interact -- but you are quite different. You adapt. You spoke French to me.
 Impressive.
 She's very different from any images we've experienced on the Holodeck, isn't she? More -- you might say -- intuitive.
 I suppose it's an understandable progression. Computers make decisions based on inputs and we humans give off many subtle signs which communicate our emotions.
 Doesn't love always begin that way? With the illusion being more real than the woman?
 I think I'll be leaving.
 Two's company.
 This is your diversion, Number One. Not mine.
 I don't dance.
 Thank you, no.
 What?
 (to computer) Exit.
 (touches a panel) bridge, this is the captain. Situation report.
 (tense) Computer! Explain Red Alert.
 Why wasn't I notified?
 Present condition.
 (beat, thinks) Locate Lieutenant Commander Data.
 Explain.
 Evacuated!? Was the condition that critical?
 Position report.
 Destination?
 Am I to understand that the Bynars have stolen the Enterprise?
 (a beat, strong) It's the Bynars -- and you're part of this.
 That explains, Riker... What about me?
 What do they want with the Enterprise? What's their purpose?
 Come on, Number One. We've got to regain control of our ship!
 Captain's log, supplemental. We now know "who" has commandeered the Enterprise... the Bynars. We can't communicate with the bridge. Commander Riker and I will now try to regain control of our ship.
 This way.
 That's our first stop, to verify the containment, and initiate auto-destruct.
 The ship has been commandeered by a force of unknown size and intent. We're here alone. We must assume the worst.
 If we don't regain control, no one else will have it either. This is the only decision involving the operation of this ship which requires you and I to agree totally.
 About that, there is no option.
 It's sufficient to get to the bridge... once there, either we'll get control of the ship and shut off the auto-destruct, or we won't. The important thing is that this ship does not fall into hostile hands.
 Set auto-destruct sequence.
 Let's go. The only place we can stop the count is from the bridge.
 An enormous amount of data is being received and stored in the main computer.
 It's another piece to this puzzle.
 They've locked it off.
 (continuing) We've got to find another way to get in.
 It takes several seconds to materialize. You wouldn't stand a chance.
 No. We'll beam in simultaneously in two different areas of the bridge.
 Right. Coordinates for Main Bridge -- port forward for me and aft for you.
 Why did you steal my ship?
 Cancel auto-destruct.
 They appear dead.
 (continuing) Let's see if we can get some answers from Bynaus.
 What about all the people in that world who are totally dependant on their computer? Are they still functioning?
 They went to a lot of trouble to clear computer space. See what they've stored.
 They were desperate to steal this ship, bring it here to store all this information. Why?
 Perhaps they did.
 Maybe.
 Their only chance was to transfer all the stored information and shut down until after it passed. Then, reactivate their system and transfer the information back to this main computer.
 So what went wrong?
 But why steal the ship? Why didn't they say something? Why didn't they just ask for help?
 Is there anything we can do?
 They wouldn't intentionally hide it or make it difficult for us to find. It's got to be right in front of us.
 Starbase 74 -- this is the Enterprise.
 We'll get into that later. Right now I must speak with Lieutenant Commander Data.
 Data, the Bynars have stored an enormous amount of information in the computer. We can't access it, and we must.
 I know, but what could it be?
 They want us to find it. They would have kept it simple.
 Could it be that simple? (to Riker) Try it.
 Well done, Will. Now access the file and start the transfer.
 Let me get on the other position. The Bynars always work in pairs, perhaps that is also required.
 It appears to be successful. The system has started up -- a resident diagnostic program is running. Their system is incredible.
 Why didn't you just ask for our help?
 So you stole it.
 No one's been hurt. They accomplished their objective. They have their world back in order, and we have our ship.
 (continuing) It's been some time since I had the Conn.
 (continuing) But, not to worry, Number One you're in good hands. Starbase 74 -- at warp two.
 (continuing) Engage.
 (continuing) Under complete control.
 We are all right, everything is fine. Now -- I want a complete check of all systems and divisions.
 Turn them over to Quinteros. (to the Bynars) There will be a hearing.
 Permission granted.
 Maybe that too, was part of the Bynar's program. Some relationships just can't work.
 Captain's log, stardate 41463.9. We are mapping the Pleiades Cluster which has many young planets and we've been asked by the Federation to visit a group terraforming Velara III, which we would very much like to see. Communications have been erratic and there is some concern about their welfare.
 at their respective stations -- all study Velara III on the Main Viewer. As Velara III SETTLES INTO PLACE on the Main Viewer:
 It takes special people to live in such desolation.
 Hailing frequency, Lieutenant Yar.
 Velara III base, this is Captain Picard of the starship Enterprise.
 (continuing) Lieutenant Yar... ?
 Velara III, this is the Enterprise. Come in please.
 (concerned) Velara III, do you copy?
 Terraform Command has asked us to see how you were getting along.
 (a pause) Your staff is all well, I presume, Director?
 Is there anything we can do to help?... You and your staff are welcome aboard for a change of scene and some rest. We have some Holodecks you might enjoy.
 (to Troi) Of what?
 We've heard so much about your remarkable achievements in terraforming, that my staff would very much appreciate looking around.
 We do not require any special attention.
 Whether he wants us or not... (touching his com) Director Mandl, unless you are absolutely refusing permission for us to land on your station, please prepare to receive my away team.
 Stay on your toes, Number One. Counselor, perhaps you should go along. A man this tense is unpredictable.
 Captain's log, supplemental. What began as a routine visit to the Federation group terraforming Velara III has become a serious situation. Arthur Malencon, the hydraulics engineer, has been killed in an extraordinary accident.
 Situation report, Number One.
 Keep me informed.
 Away team report now! What is happening?
 None at all, Mr. Mandl. Until this is sorted out, I've provided temporary quarters for you and your crew. I suggest you use them.
 An attack on one of my crew gives me the right, Mr. Mandl.
 Your schedule is on hold, until I have a satisfactory explanation of what happened.
 (crisp) Director Mandl. Wait. (to Tasha) Escort the director to his quarters.
 Proceed with your report.
 Speculation or certainty?
 Then the question is not who, because obviously it was one of the three remaining terraformers. The question is why. What are they hiding? What is so important it could make one of them, or all of them desperate enough to take a life?
 Not yet.
 Doctor Crusher?
 Good. Data, I want you and Geordi to return for a more careful inspection.
 Evidence of tampering, negligence, sabotage... whatever. I don't know, but the answer's there, on the planet.
 (continuing) Tasha, I'd like you to provide Counselor Troi and me with complete personnel files on our three guests. Psych profiles, training, everything. I'm looking for motive, intent... the psychological capacity to commit one murder and attempt another.
 (continuing, to Riker) It seems we've become policemen, Number One.
 Captain's log, supplemental. On my order, Data's startling discovery of a possible indigenous and inorganic life-form -- something hitherto thought impossible...
 (continuing) ... has been beamed aboard so that its true nature might be uncovered.
 What are we looking at?
 (rhetorically) What's causing that hum?
 Understandable, given this particular life-form's novel nature.
 Doctor Crusher is still making her determination. (beat) I presume you know the Prime Directive, Mr. Mandl.
 I don't know. But I intend to find out. (level beat) You're a man obsessed with what he does. Who knows what an obsessed man would do to keep going? Kill, perhaps?
 What do you think?
 Counselor?
 What about his file, Lieutenant Yar? Could he have accomplished the reprogramming that Data says took place?
 What about the others? Including the victim.
 What is it?
 I can't see any difference.
 Translation? From whom?
 (into communicator) bridge, this is the captain. Request emergency power to increase lab quarantine seal...
 We have confirmed Data's discovery is life, but more than that - it is intelligent.
 (beat, and:) It has just taken possession of the Medical Lab.
 Because it's trying to communicate with us!
 Captain's log, supplemental. We are attempting to deal with the aggressive inorganic life-form which Data brought up from the planet. It has taken over the Medical Lab, and is apparently attempting to communicate with us.
 Mr. La Forge -- can we see into the lab yet?
 (to Beverly) Doctor?
 Continue backup to shield, Lieutenant.
 Counselor, I'll need you. (to Riker) You have the bridge, Number One.
 (to Mandl) What do you know of this life-form?
 You knew of its existence.
 But, you tried to hide that knowledge from us.
 They are not only alive but they have intelligence.
 They're trying to communicate with us.
 I need information, now. When did you first see them? What were they doing? Why did you think they were alive?
 (into Com) Patch visual to Observation Lounge...
 We see it too, Number One.
 (imperative) Get that seal back up!
 Bags of mostly water?
 (after reacting) Do you understand me?
 We didn't hear you. We come in peace.
 Can you hear me?
 (continuing) Duty stations! Report!
 What is it, Data?
 (nods) More is stronger.
 Captain's log, supplemental. We've stumbled on a life-form...
 (continuing) ... biologically and psychologically difficult for us to fully understand. (beat) The only thing totally clear is that this microbrain, as we've come to call it, has declared war on us.
 Data -- any analysis of those bolts of light they emit?
 Have we disabled the Medical Lab computer console?
 Let's use the calm. Medical Lab on main viewer.
 Lieutenant Yar - set coordinates to beam it back where it came from.
 Energize!
 Life-form or not... intelligent or not -- the safety of this ship and all on her are my primary responsibility. (moment, and:) Data -- evacuate the air from the Medical Lab. I want a vacuum in there.
 Suggestions? (silence) Anyone?
 I need your help. We have communicated with the life-form discovered on Velara III.
 It has told us that it attempted to communicate with you, and you ignored it.
 What you were doing was so threatening to them that they killed your hydraulics engineer to stop it. They have declared a state of war.
 Yes, and we're on the defensive. I need your help. I have to find some way to fight them. We no longer have control of the Medical Lab, or the computer. At this moment they have the power to destroy this ship and everyone on it.
 They said you killed some of them. I need to know how.
 Exactly what was Malencon doing when he was killed?
 Why would that kill some of them?
 And to prevent its loss, they killed Malencon.
 Reason enough for anyone to go to war.
 Then what's feeding the damn thing!?
 Meaning?
 Okay, let's see if darkness will neutralize them. Kill the lights in the lab, Mr. La Forge. We can at least do that.
 Number One...
 We are happy to agree with you.
 In time, Mr. Data. When we're better prepared.
 And our respect. (then) Lieutenant Yar...
 Energize!
 Captain's log, stardate 41464.2. Declaring indefinite quarantine for the Velara System...
 (continuing) ... Returning to starbase with surviving Terraformers.
 Ah, Number One.
 A curiosity. For the past several hours we have been tracking faint energy readings in an attempt to locate the source. It's been like following a trail of bread crumbs.
 (continuing) The path lead here and stopped -- which is what I knew would interest you.
 Where?
 All stop.
 Anything?
 On screen.
 Shields and deflectors up.
 Captain's log, stardate 41509.1. Either by chance or intent, we've been led to the mythical planet of Aldea, which appeared out of nowhere, hidden behind a sophisticated shielding device.
 A cloaking device.
 Let's let them know our peaceful intent. Open hailing frequencies, Lieutenant Yar.
 I am Captain Jean-Luc Picard of the USS Enterprise. We come in peace.
 We've heard the stories about Aldea, but frankly never thought they could possibly be true.
 A very long time to have that kind of technology. Why are you revealing yourself now?
 We're ready anytime.
 It was a little sudden
 Welcome aboard.
 It's all right. (to the Aldeans) Our medical doctor is concerned you didn't go through our regular transporting procedure.
 We'd be delighted. Number One, assemble your away team.
 Amazing. Only to exist in mythology and suddenly they're here, right in front of us. Number One?
 Counselor? What do you sense?
 Interesting choices.
 Wesley!
 Shields up. La Forge, contact Commander Riker. Worf, check all other decks.
 All decks? Everything? The entire ship?
 Are you all right, Wesley?
 And that's what they have.
 Status!
 Keep trying, Lieutenant. Counselor, gather the parents.
 ... Go on.
 Harm has already been done.
 (angrily) Compensation! You steal our children -- from their classrooms -- their bedrooms -- and you talk about compensation. Return them... now!
 I shouldn't have lost my temper.
 The Aldeans are anxious to discuss "compensation." That will buy us time. I've asked Doctor Crusher to be involved in the negotiations as your representative.
 We can't be sure. We do know the Aldeans can't have children of their own.
 I won't insult you by pretending it will be easy. I can only say the Enterprise will not leave them behind. Be assured of that.
 I will do my best to arrange it.
 Any response from Aldea, Lieutenant Yar?
 You're saying there are holes in their defense system?
 Can we beam down an away team through one of these so-called holes?
 Can you do that?
 Keep trying. (turning to Riker) Number One, while he's doing that, you find a way of getting through one of those holes because one way or the other we have to get an away team on that planet, locate the power source of that shield and neutralize it.
 Oh, they'll negotiate, Number One. Or call it that. They took what they wanted, now they'll rationalize it by throwing us some sort of bone.
 The minute they believe we will accept no compensation for the children, they will end all discussion and disappear behind their shield... locking us out and the children in -- forever. That's why I have to keep them talking.
 Captain's log, supplemental. We remain in orbit around Aldea. It's becoming all too evident that talk will not effect the return of our children. We must neutralize the Aldean shield. Until then we are helpless.
 Doctor Crusher and I are ready, Radue.
 No. Doctor Crusher is a Staff Officer, Radue. Starfleet Regulation 6.57 requires at least two staff officers to be present during any treaty or contract negotiations.
 Neither am I, Data.
 Doctor Crusher, report to the bridge... Now we'll see what they have in mind.
 Open hailing frequency, Lieutenant Yar.
 I want to see the children before we begin.
 Radue, we do not condone your actions. You're attempting to salve your conscience by offering goods in exchange for our children.
 We happen to like these particular children.
 Radue, we do sympathize. But surely there is a solution which can be mutually satisfactory.
 A significant beginning, I think. But first I must ask again that Doctor Crusher be allowed to speak with her son before we continue.
 What was that?
 Position report.
 Geordi, take us back to Aldea orbit. Warp factor nine.
 Captain's log, stardate 41509.45. We are twenty hours away from Aldea, and no closer to a solution. Their deliberate show of force pushed us out of orbit and could have disintegrated the ship. In the face of that power, a direct assault on Aldea would be disastrous.
 Captain's log, supplemental. It has been three days since the Aldeans pushed us away. We have had no contact with Radue since then.
 Lieutenant Yar, open hailing frequencies.
 Radue, this is Captain Picard.
 There is room for discussion, Radue.
 Data, find a way to defeat that shield.
 Things are impossible, until they're not.
 We're all dying, Doctor. Can you be more specific?
 Then that's why they can't conceive.
 An entire civilization that's terminally ill... is it reversible?
 Good work, Doctor.
 Is there anything I can do?
 And that's what's made the Aldeans sterile?
 Is it reversible?
 How long?
 Then why can't we beam the children up through the hole?
 What are you suggesting, Number One?
 I'll try to delay the Aldeans until you're ready.
 Doctor Crusher and I are prepared to conclude these negotiations.
 A strike? I'll see what I can do.
 It's not over yet, Wesley.
 Good, Wesley. Now...
 Yes, Harry.
 I will tell him, Harry, and I will tell him how much I admire his son.
 They want to go home.
 (his communicator) Number One.
 Hold for orders.
 The shield that protects your world in one way has weakened it in another. It's the radiation of your own sun which is destroying you.
 That is exactly it. The shield that protects you, has weakened and your computer has controlled your lives so completely you've lost the desire to even question it.
 Commander Riker.
 I assume you have control of the computer.
 Good. (using com) Enterprise, this is Picard. Beam the children up.
 Beam them up.
 We are not here to destroy you, Radue. We can help you.
 The legacy your Progenitors left you, Radue. The source of your power. And your problems.
 Will you let us help?
 Are you finished?
 The legend will die, but the people will live.
 Wesley!
 Mister La Forge, out of orbit. Warp five.
 You never ask a woman her age, Mister Data.
 Some customs will never change.
 (touching his communicator) Picard here.
 Admiral Gregory Quinn. Why wasn't I informed earlier, Lieutenant Yar?
 I'm on my way to the Transporter Room, Lieutenant. Number One!
 This is unexpected. Welcome aboard, Admiral.
 Allow me to present my staff: First Officer William Riker, Chief Medical Officer Beverly Crusher, chief of security, Lieutenant Tasha Yar.
 (continuing) What can we do for you?
 Certainly. This way. Number One.
 Is this personal?
 Then my first officer...
 Captain's log, stardate 41416. 2. We are orbiting Relva 7, one of the testing sites where final examinations are taking place for entrance into Starfleet Academy. But with the appearance of my old colleague, Admiral Gregory Quinn, our stay has taken on another meaning.
 Oh?
 What are you looking for?
 Tell me what you suspect.
 Yes, sir.
 Greg, we've known each other for years. If you weren't just motivating young Mister Remmick, tell me what you believe is wrong.
 As you wish, Admiral.
 Come.
 Always, Number One.
 I agree. You should.
 That is his job.
 Which you do very well.
 I don't know.
 I couldn't tell you.
 No less so for me. But I have promised full cooperation. And we shall give it.
 No need, Number One. Mister Remmick's presence is unnerving, to say the least.
 No, Mister Remmick. Be my guest.
 Excellent, Number One.
 Who is it, Lieutenant?
 Bridge to Main Shuttlebay. Mister Kurland... This is Captain Picard. Respond.
 Lock off the bay launch doors.
 Enterprise to shuttlecraft. Mister Kurland.
 Tell him in person. Bring the ship back. Now.
 Probable impact?
 Options?
 (to Remmick) Either get out of my way and be quiet, or I will have you escorted from the bridge... Visual on shuttle cockpit.
 Stay calm, Jake. We'll get you back.
 Jake!
 Mister Kurland! You are not going to die out there. Do exactly as I tell you. Take the nose of the shuttle and aim it directly at Relva 7.
 Jake, listen carefully. I'm the captain and I'm giving you an order. Aim the shuttle at Relva. Now.
 Good. Monitor your speed exactly. When it hits point zero-two-zero, I want you to restart the engine and pull up, hard!
 You'll just have to trust me.
 Hang on tight. It's going to be bumpy.
 Now! Start the engine!
 Mister Kurland, can you maneuver the shuttle home?
 Do so. Then report to Mister Riker.
 Young men sometimes make rash choices, Mister Remmick. Which is why Mister Kurland will receive a strong refresher specifically in discipline...
 Full cooperation, Number One.
 Yes. It's exactly as I explained it in the log records.
 One of my crew was held unjustly. I stand by my decision.
 (continuing) Mister Remmick, you have talked to everyone on this ship. I think you've had enough time to find out whatever it is you need to know.
 The only thing I'm guilty of is allowing this charade to go on too long.
 If it's me you're after, Admiral, ask me directly what you want to know. Then tell me exactly what's going on.
 How much time? I won't tolerate my crew being harassed any longer.
 I want to be here when he presents it.
 This has been a strain on our friendship.
 It's not him I'm judging.
 What kind of problems?
 What's your evidence?
 What do you want from me?
 You have my complete support. You know that.
 The Academy?
 Then there was never a problem with the Enterprise.
 Greg, the real issue is politics. I'm no good at politics. Surely there are others more suited.
 I appreciate the value of what you're offering. It's not something I can decide quickly.
 All right. You'll have it tonight, Admiral.
 Yes, Number One?
 Yes. He found nothing wrong on the Enterprise. You may inform the crew that Admiral Quinn is most impressed.
 They were after me, Number One. They want me to take over as Commandant of Starfleet Academy.
 Yes I have, Number One. I'm going for a walk.
 Mister Kurland!
 Are you... feeling better?
 Good idea. I hope you learned that running away doesn't solve anything, young man.
 I know. But you did keep your wits about you out there... don't forget that.
 You're welcome.
 Mister Crusher? Why aren't you in your dress uniform for Admiral Quinn's farewell dinner?
 Why not?
 Ridiculous. Did you do your best?
 (continuing) When you test next year -- and you will test again -- do you think your performance will improve?
 Good. The only person you're truly competing against is yourself.
 Your failures and successes have to be measured within, Wesley. Not by me or anyone else... But if it helps you to know this, I failed my first time. And you may not tell anyone!
 Yes. But not the second time. Now, do me the honor of sitting next to me at dinner. I'm going to have to disappoint an old friend.
 I'll serve you better here.
 If you need me...
 Set course to Algeron 4, Mister Crusher.
 You know, we're really alike, you and I. Both explorers to the core... Engage, Mister Crusher.
 What is the nature of the disturbance?
 Answer "affirmative." (to Geordi) Lieutenant La Forge, lay in the course.
 It's a little out of their area.
 Let's get some more information first.
 Speed -- warp seven.
 Engage.
 That's a name we haven't heard for a while.
 If the Romulans have returned to this sector we should know about it.
 Not yet. Worf, any further activity?
 Slow to half impulse.
 Shields and deflectors up.
 On the Main Viewer.
 Magnify!
 Any trace of the other ship?
 (to Worf) Send this to Starfleet. We are entering the Neutral Zone. (to Geordi) Get us in a little closer, Mister La Forge. Stay sharp everyone.
 Any life signs?
 Stay sharp. If this is a result of a Romulan attack, they could still be in the area.
 What do you mean "possible?"
 Lieutenant Yar, remain at your post. Whoever attacked the freighter may still be in the area.
 Lieutenant La Forge, are we close enough to use the Visual Acuity transmitter?
 Then please do. And Number One - everything about this seems wrong.
 Captain's log, stardate 41503.7. We have entered the Neutral Zone. A Talarian freighter has been severely damaged in a battle. Why, and with whom is unknown. Personal note: I hope this event is not a precursor of things to come, and that the peace which has endured for the last several decades will continue.
 This is the Enterprise.
 Ready to receive. (to the bridge crew) Put this on the Main Viewer.
 Extraordinary.
 I understand him better than I ever have.
 Geordi. What was that? Over to the left.
 That -- right there? No -- back. Yes. That -- right there. What is it?
 To me it's just an undefined upright form, standing in a wild visual frenzy. Can you filter out the extraneous information?
 It's a jumble. How can you make heads or tails of it?
 How is that possible?
 It's something you learn.
 Yes. Look over at Data.
 (continuing) There's an aura around Data.
 From the way you say that, you must think we all see it.
 Yes, of course, Number One. Proceed.
 Step closer.
 (continuing) It looks to me like a spectrograph indicating metal fatigue. Is that how you interpret it?
 I've lost the transmission.
 What's going on?
 What is it? What are you seeing?
 Klingons.
 Tasha, go to Transporter Room Three. I want you there when the away team returns.
 They're out of options. Do it.
 I'll be in Sickbay.
 Granted.
 Situation, Doctor.
 I am Jean-Luc Picard, the captain of this vessel.
 Do you mind telling me what happened?
 Firstly, what were you doing on that ship? It's not Klingon.
 What was the ship doing in the Neutral Zone?
 What precipitated the attack?
 There are still a few items that are not clear.
 Yes, of course.
 Permission granted.
 There's a lot more to this than we've been told. Why was the Talarian ship so far off course? What was its point of departure?
 Contact Starfleet -- find out what they know about Korris and company.
 They are going to be with us for a while; we might as well learn all we can about them.
 No -- Worf is capable of dealing with anything that may arise. (to Beverly) How's your patient, Doctor?
 Commander Korris, this is Captain Picard.
 I am sorry to report -- your comrade's injuries are beyond our medical abilities.
 Can you identify it, Mister Data?
 Keep a close watch on it. We're too close to the Neutral Zone for it to be random.
 I believe, Number One, that was the first time outsiders witnessed the Klingon death ritual. I think I can figure out why they look into the dying man's eyes - but the howling... ?
 To whom?
 Can we get a visual?
 Magnify.
 Open hailing frequencies, Lieutenant Yar.
 To Klingon cruiser -- this is Captain Jean-Luc Picard of the USS Enterprise.
 We came to investigate a battle. We rescued three Klingon survivors.
 These men are not from the cruiser, they are off the freighter Batris. The leader is Captain Korris.
 Yes.
 (to Tasha) Where are they now?
 Deck Seventeen?
 No. Send a security team to Deck Seventeen.
 Right now, Number One, we cannot assume anything.
 Lead the security team. And Lieutenant -- remember with whom you are dealing.
 A Klingon vessel is due to arrive. They have requested return of the renegades.
 Lieutenant Worf, understand that I am not unmindful of the mixed feelings you must have about this incident.
 None that I can see.
 So far. But he must be torn. These are his people.
 Open frequencies.
 We will prepare for transfer.
 Permission granted.
 (into Com) Lieutenant Yar, escort the prisoners to the Transporter Room.
 Keep me informed, Lieutenant.
 Data, visual on K'Nera.
 There will be a slight delay, Captain. Korris has escaped.
 I think we can handle the situation.
 Commander Korris. This is a futile effort. You cannot win.
 I understand, Lieutenant.
 We'll both go.
 What's the siutation?
 How do you suggest we proceed?
 Talk to him, Worf.
 Wait.
 Open hailing frequencies.
 Commander K'Nera, this is Captain Picard.
 Korris and the other Klingon are dead.
 Do you wish the bodies?
 Commendable, Lieutenant. Mister La Forge, set course for Starbase Eight-four.
 Good.
 Speed -- warp five.
 ... And Worf.
 (continuing) The bridge wouldn't be the same without you.
 Engage.
 Captain's log, stardate 41798.2. We are ordered by Starfleet, to proceed to the Lorenze Cluster and investigate the disappearance of the light cruiser USS Drake, which was in that system trying to unravel a mystery of its own.
 (continuing) Recent long range probes indicate that all intelligent life on the planet Minos has disappeared.
 Number One?
 Mister Data?
 Standard orbit, Mister La Forge.
 You know Captain Rice?
 Tell me about him.
 Oh.
 I'd call that arrogant.
 Number One, weren't you offered the Drake?
 None?
 Your sensors indicated no intelligent life?
 Put it on the Main Viewer.
 I am Captain Jean-Luc Picard of the USS Enterprise. To whom am I speaking?
 It must be left over from the time of the Romulan wars, when the business of selling arms was booming.
 Screen off.
 If an automated message system is still functioning -- other systems on the planet may also be operational.
 Possibly.
 Prepare your away team, Number One.
 Bridge. Captain speaking.
 Keep this channel open.
 Yes, I heard, Number One. We'll try to track it down from here.
 What's going on Number One?
 (confused by the apparent contradiction) Lieutenant Solis?
 Careful, Number One.
 Report, Number One.
 Number One, get your team back here.
 (tense, tight) What just happened down there? Number One! Report!
 Report! Report!
 Is he alive?
 Transporter Room Three - have you locked on to the away team?
 (crisply) Lieutenant Solis, situation report.
 Data, have you been able to assess Commander Riker's condition?
 Theorize. What's the purpose of the encasement?
 Which would suggest what?
 Stand by. I'm coming down.
 Yes. (into Com) Doctor Crusher, this is the Captain. Meet me in Transporter Room Three. (to Geordi) Mister La Forge, you have command of the bridge.
 Whatever happens below, your prime responsibility is to the ship.
 Noted.
 What is it?
 He's alive. What he ran into is an intelligence gathering device used during the Ersalrope Wars.
 It projects an image of someone the subject will trust -- gets as much information as possible.
 Can you remove it?
 We have little choice. Whatever has him is interrupting the transporter beam. Remove it.
 Doctor!
 Beverly!
 How bad is it?
 Hold on. We'll get you out of here. (he touches his communicator) Enterprise, this is the Captain. Two to beam up.
 (continuing) Enterprise.
 (continuing; he touches it again) Data... Lieutenant Yar.
 I don't know. But it's all right because once they realize our communicators are out, the sensors will locate us and Geordi will beam us up.
 (reassuring) Hold on. It won't be long.
 Oh, no you don't -- no time to sleep.
 Come on, stay with me, Doctor.
 (continuing) Stay alert, Doctor! That's an order, damn it!
 I've stopped the bleeding --
 This is going to hurt a bit, Doctor.
 Doctor -- you have to stay awake -- you have to help me! Tell me what to do.
 (continuing) What else can I do?
 I can't find your medical kit.
 These?
 (continuing) I don't know.
 It's very bitter --
 I understand.
 What do we do next, Doctor?
 (continuing) Help me -- you've got to help me!
 (continuing) The patient has lost a great deal of blood from multiple lacerations. What's your diagnosis, Doctor?
 What do I do?
 All right. Stay with me, Doctor. Keep talking...
 No, but I'll find something.
 (continuing) Keep up your end. Stay awake. That's an order, Doctor.
 You poor fools. The first time you tested it, or demonstrated it... something went wrong and your creation destroyed you.
 What was that noise?
 Can you stop it?
 Yes -- we're here.
 Doctor Crusher has been seriously injured. Our communicators are out and I haven't been able to contact the Enterprise.
 None that I know of. Number One, those devices are part of a system which is located down here. Another is about to be released.
 (concerned) Data!
 We have to find a way to stop this system.
 Is it possible to re-adjust the targeting sequence?
 Data, assign it a neutral target.
 Itself, then. Have it track itself or the power source that manufactures it.
 Give me some options, Data... Quickly.
 (to Data) Is that possible?
 (to the Peddler) Shut it off.
 We've seen enough.
 If that's what it takes to shut it off. Yes... I've seen enough -- you've made a sale.
 Now... end the demonstration.
 Number One!
 (into com) Lieutenant La Forge.
 Captain's log, stardate 41801.3. We are crossing through the Zed Lapis sector, where we will rendezvous with Shuttlecraft Thirteen carrying Deanna Troi, who is returning from a psychology conference.
 (continuing) Because Engineering is taking this opportunity to complete preventive maintenance on dilithium crystals, we are traveling on impulse power.
 Very good, Lieutenant. (to Riker) It's not the same around here without Counselor Troi, is it, Number One?
 Put it on the Main Viewer.
 Then open the frequency.
 Position report.
 Lieutenant Prieto, is Counselor Troi all right?
 Main Engineering!
 How long will it take to return to warp power?
 There's an emergency, Lynch. I need warp drive. How long?
 We don't have it.
 Whatever it takes.
 Lieutenant, report!
 Engineering! Status report!
 Deanna, we'll be right there.
 Captain's log, supplemental. We've lost all contact with Shuttlecraft Thirteen -- and can only assume they've crash-landed on Vagra Two. Main Engineering is working at top speed to return us to warp power.
 Warp eight.
 You heard the order. Make it so.
 What is this place, Mister Data?
 Standard orbit.
 She means a lot to all of us.
 Life signs?
 Can we beam up the injured?
 That's very unusual.
 (distracted) Yes.
 No. Wait. (something is picking at him) Not yet.
 I understand, but for the moment I want all systems at full readiness -- especially propulsion.
 Assemble your team, Number One.
 What kind of a problem, Number One?
 Maintain an open frequency.
 Number One, can you beam around it?
 Data, is it alive?
 What is it, Number One? What are you seeing?
 Captain's log, supplemental. While on the planet Vagra Two to rescue members of the crew who were injured in a rather strange and unexplained shuttle crash, the away team, lead by Commander Riker, has encountered a strange creature which seems to be able to take many forms, including something which is humanoid.
 Go easy, Number One. Let's find out what it is we are dealing with here.
 And Number One, I don't believe the location shuttle crash and the proximity of this creature is necessarily a coincidence.
 Number One?
 Transporter Room. Get them up. Now!
 Yellow Alert, Lieutenant Worf. I'll be in Sickbay.
 Status, Doctor?
 Bring her back.
 You've saved people before. You can save her.
 What does that mean?
 She moved!
 (urgently) Doctor?
 Gone?
 All right. This is very emotional for all of us, but we still have members of this crew down on that planet, so, until the shuttle crew is safely aboard this ship, our feelings will have to wait.
 (continuing) Lieutenant Worf, you are now chief of security.
 Doctor, what is the status of the shuttle crew?
 A powerful creature against whom we seem to have no defense. Number One.
 What does it want?
 Agreed, Lieutenant... Number One, I see no other choice. Prepare your away team.
 Number One.
 Chart it.
 I'm beaming you up!
 Captain's log, supplemental. There is grave danger to the crew on Vagra Two. My first officer is missing - attacked by this entity known as "ARMUS."
 There are a great deal of fluctuations.
 (indicating points on the graph) And here -- and here? Where the energy is lowest?
 So when it is provoked in a certain way its forcefield is weakened... Troi must have the answer. I'm beaming down. You have the Conn, Lieutenant.
 ... Go with me? No, Wesley. You can be of more help to Lieutenant Worf.
 ...No.
 I'll tell her, Wes.
 Captain Jean-Luc Picard of the Enterprise. Is Commander Riker dead?
 No.
 Yes.
 Don't struggle, Mister Data.
 Mister Data... (then:) ARMUS, we are through dealing with / you.
 It doesn't matter. We will no longer amuse you.
 Yes. You can. But only I can make them perform. They follow my orders.
 Not until I know if the ones in the shuttle are still alive. I must see them.
 Then our business is complete.
 I do care.
 (continuing) Shall I tell you what true evil is? It is to submit to you. It is when we surrender our freedom, our dignity instead of defying you. Do what you will. We will take the consequences.
 But is he all right?
 I want you all out of here. (into com) Enterprise, beam up the away team -- immediately.
 Do I have it?
 No. Not yet.
 Enterprise, four to beam up.
 I want to see my people on the shuttle.
 Troi.
 We registered a weakening of ARMUS' energy while he was talking / to you. What was going on?
 Lieutenant Worf, I'm going to try and break this impasse. Monitor carefully.
 How long have you been on this planet?
 Someone was here before?
 They abandoned you. Who were they?
 It must be very lonely.
 Haven't you seen we humans are capable of compassion?
 But our spirit soars. A great poet once said "all spirits are enslaved which serve things evil."
 Because you are not.
 Nothing in the universe is the same as anything else -- but everything has light and dark.
 (continuing) They did not leave you because they hated you. They didn't understand you.
 Captain's log, supplemental. The shuttlecraft has been destroyed to prevent any possibility of Armus leaving the planet. Vagra 2 has been declared an off-limits planet, but the damage has been done. One of the saddest duties I have to perform is ahead of me.
 We are here together to honor our friend and comrade Lieutenant Natasha Yar. We will have much time to grieve for her in the days ahead, but for now, she has asked that we celebrate her life -- with her. She has left a living will.
 Au revoir, Natasha.
 (continuing) The service is concluded.
 Oh? How so?
 No, you didn't, Data. You got it.
 All hands, this is the captain. The sun in the Delos system is undergoing large-scale magnetic field changes, producing violent, gigantic flares.
 (continuing) We will be studying this star at close range. Even though we will be running with full deflectors, the closeness of the event and its severity are going to create problems.
 Intense magnetic fields have a disruptive effect on electrical systems. We can therefore expect an interruption of communications, and potential temporary loss of other systems. As a precaution, we are now going to Yellow Alert...
 (continuing) Stay sharp, everyone.
 Lieutenant La Forge?
 Half impulse.
 On Main Viewer.
 Mask out the photosphere.
 Magnify. Quadrant one-seven, sector four-zero-three.
 And humbling, Number One.
 Status report.
 Understandable. Data?
 Mister La Forge, move us closer.
 (continuing) We'll be pushing our deflectors to the limit, but we'll get a good look at this phenomenon.
 Let me hear it.
 Open hailing frequency.
 Unidentified freighter, this is the USS Enterprise. May we be of assistance?
 Can't you enhance the image?
 Set a course to intersect with the freighter. Warp two.
 Maintain Yellow Alert.
 Helm -- get us in as close as possible to the freighter's orbit.
 How long until it loses integrity?
 (he touches his arm-panel) Unidentified freighter, this is the USS Enterprise.
 Put this on the Main Viewer.
 Freighter, this is the Enterprise. What is your situation?
 This is the Enterprise -- with all this interference it is difficult to copy your transmission -- if you all talk at once... it is impossible. Now -- please -- say again. What is your situation?
 (to himself) At last. (to T'Jon) How can we help?
 That's very vague. What's the computer analysis?
 Data... can you tap into their computer and clarify the situation?
 Yes. Captain T'Jon -- we are going to lock on our tractor beam and pull you out of orbit.
 Captain T'Jon, we are unable to attach our tractor beam because of the intense solar activity.
 Enterprise to Sanction. We have analyzed your problem.
 Have you the necessary tools to realign the coil?
 Captain T'Jon, we will beam over a replacement coil.
 Well, once it's installed.
 What's the matter with these people? How can he be the captain of the vessel and be ignorant of its simplest functions?
 Captain T'Jon -- how long have you been in command of the freighter?
 And you don't know how to align a control coil?
 (nods to Tasha and Riker) Let's get them off there.
 Captain T'Jon. Prepare to beam over.
 Unless you have another option -- yes, I "think that's best."
 What's the holdup, Number One?
 Did you get them off?
 Cargo!? Are those people crazy? (a beat) What could possibly be that important?
 Number One -- I don't understand these people. Their lives are in danger and they're sending over cargo?
 We're losing the freighter. You've got to beam those people over now.
 Transporter Room! You're out of time.
 Number One!?
 Maintain. (to Riker) And our rather combative guests, Number One?
 Data, what can you tell me about the inhabitants of this system?
 Yes, let us pay a call and get some answers. Counselor, Number One, Mister Data...
 I am sorry we could not save your ship.
 Yes.
 Mister Data?
 (to Data) Instruct Engineering to proceed.
 My first officer has said ownership of the cargo is in dispute. This is a question which must be settled by whatever legal mechanisms exist between your societies.
 Why is that? What is the cargo?
 Indeed.
 Is that right?
 Romas -- you and T'Jon carry the disease?
 Then you may have brought it aboard my ship! (to Riker) Was there a medical scan during transport?
 Red Alert! Medical emergency -- decks twelve and thirteen. Doctor Crusher to the Observation Lounge immediately!
 Not right now.
 What have you learned?
 Perhaps the transporter filtered it out when they were beamed aboard?
 Are they going to die?
 Do you think we are in danger from this plague?
 There are some missing pieces to the puzzle, don't you feel that too?
 (lightly) Are we losing our professional detachment, Doctor?
 Understandable.
 I can't do that.
 And the Brekkians insist it is theirs.
 Maybe so, but it's not for me to decide.
 I'll talk with the Brekkians.
 Thank you.
 I am glad you are comfortable. I've come to seek your agreement to an Ornaran request.
 The Ornarans are quite ill and are insistent that they need Felicium.
 Then would you object to allowing them enough Felicium for their immediate needs?
 You would let them die rather than share the medicine?
 I'll have our medical officer handle it.
 (impressed) A very potent substance.
 None at all?
 A product for which you have no use for, but which the Ornarans can't live without.
 (interrupting) A most interesting relationship.
 Report, Doctor Crusher.
 Are the Ornarans recovering?
 Then T'Jon, Romas -- indeed every Ornaran --
 You have piqued my interest, Number One -- please continue.
 And they no longer need it.
 The Ornarans have no medical need for Felicium.
 Based on what we know so far... there is nothing I can do.
 This situation has existed for a very long time. Those two societies are intertwined in a symbiotic relationship.
 That's how you see it.
 No. We can't do that either.
 Why? Because it goes against our moral sensibilities? Our mission is not to force Federation or Earth values on others in the galaxy.
 Patch it in here.
 Some of them, yes.
 Yes. (touching his com panel) Lieutenant Yar, have the Ornarans brought in... no, wait, I don't want them to have access to the bridge. (then, to Margan) We will contact you in a few minutes. (then to Yar) I will take this in the guest quarters.
 Lieutenant Yar, we are ready in the guest quarters.
 I'm sorry.
 Let him go.
 I will not be coerced.
 (calmly) No you won't. You're not a killer and neither am I.
 I'm not sure that I can.
 Come with me, Doctor. This could be interesting.
 (to Beverly) I wonder why I expected this.
 It's the other shoe.
 But somehow, one of your ancestors realized that your desire for the drug continued after the disease had been cured. They made the connection and were able to end their addiction.
 And the refinement process of which you are so proud was a way to make Felicium even more addicting... and tighten your grip on the Ornarans even further.
 No. I can't tell them. You see, I am bound by the rules of the United Federation of Planets, which say I am not to interfere in other worlds, other cultures. To tell them any of this would be interfering and would violate the Prime Directive.
 Telling you things you already know... which changes nothing.
 Yes, I am.
 It is not for me to make any of these decisions.
 (to intercom) Acknowledged. Thank you.
 (continuing) Forgive me for doing what I must. (to T'Jon and Romas) I'm beaming you down to your world... with your Felicium.
 (firmly) No.
 I will not supply you with spare parts for your freighters. If you want them repaired, you'll have to do that yourself.
 Quite possibly.
 Nothing in the Prime Directive compels me to help you.
 No. That's not what I want.
 And you must understand that my oath as a Starfleet officer gives me no choice in the matter.
 (continuing) Transporter Room. Lock onto our guests and their cargo and beam them down to Ornara.
 Of that, you can be sure. (a beat) Good luck.
 No doubt.
 Only in the short run. Painful as it will be, the people of Ornara -- and the people of Brekka -- must shape their own destinies.
 Doctor, it was not an easy decision.
 Mister La Forge, take us out of orbit.
 Engage.
 Captain's log, stardate 41886.9. We are en route to Sarona 8 for much needed R and R. The entire crew is looking forward to the diversion. On a personal note, I have allowed myself the luxury of a head start.
 
 En garde.
 
 
 No, no. The advantage was yours, Number One. I'm out of practice... too much time on the bridge. En garde!
 
 
 
 The technique of a desperate man. Shall we...
 
 Picard to bridge. Report.
 We're on our way, Mister Data.
 Where did it come from?
 Hazard a guess, Mister Data.
 That far?
 
 Lieutenant La Forge, set coordinates for that sector. Shields at full power.
 Put it on audio, Lieutenant.
 Turn it off. Lay in a course for those coordinates, La Forge. Warp eight.
 
 ... Who disappeared over fifteen years ago. Along with his wife, Laura.
 No. He was teaching at the University when I was in Paris, but I never had the pleasure. Number One, you have the Conn. Inform me half an hour before we reach the coordinates.
 
 Computer, this is Captain Picard.
 Paris. Twenty-two years ago. A warm spring day. April ninth. Eighteen hundred hours -- three o'clock.
 No, I've been here before.
 (continuing) That table.
 I've been away far too long.
 
 I'm afraid I'm not hungry. I really came for the view.
 Perhaps not. It was many years ago, I had a rendezvous -- I was to meet someone, a young woman, here, at this very table.
 I don't know, actually. I've always imagined that she did.
 
 Yes, I'm sure he will.
 He's stationed here?
 
 If he's as young as you are, maybe he doesn't know yet exactly what he wants to do.
 I would tell him that he must be the person he is meant to be... and that you deserve nothing less than that.
 A glass for the young lady.
 No. Yes, you do. It's hard to say, it has been many years.
 
 Not a single detail. I can see every inch of her to this day and being here -- I can feel the softness of her in the breeze, smell the fragrance of her in the flowers. I have not forgotten.
 Laura.
 You've been at that console twice as long as you estimated.
 Nonsense. Out with it.
 You don't know how?
 What came through this window?
 (continuing) A window, that's all you know.
 
 Manheim.
 Set course for the new coordinates.
 
 Mister La Forge, standard orbit. Give me a visual.
 Penetrable?
 Open hailing frequencies.
 This is the USS Enterprise responding to your signal for help.
 
 Can you lock onto her coordinates?
 Mrs. Manheim, this is... the captain of the Enterprise. Is your husband conscious?
 There's a force field surrounding your planet.
 Good. Then you must be very brave and leave his side long enough to shut down the system that is preventing us from helping you.
 (continuing) Good. (to crew) Lock onto their coordinates and beam them up.
 
 Fine, Number One.
 Well, the first time he's "in" be sure you find out what the hell he was up to down there.
 No.
 
 
 Laura.
 
 
 Bridge, Picard. Status report.
 
 We can't wait for this man to wake up to find out what's going on here. Clearly, whatever this window is, it's still open.
 When did this start?
 
 Laura, I'm afraid I need to ask you a number of questions - and time is of the essence.
 Nor I.
 
 Not exactly. Nothing works just as you hope... Laura, I'm sorry about your husband. (beat) I need some information from you.
 But you must know something of the nature of his experiments.
 Why did he come here? Why Vandor?
 What he was working on is unquestionably quite dangerous as well as out of control.
 
 Why weren't you affected?
 
 Fifteen years here? By yourself?
 
 I must send a team to the planet.
 
 She's an old friend.
 What's his prognosis?
 How long does he have?
 Can I talk to him?
 Doctor.
 (continuing) I haven't seen Mrs. Manheim since Paris.
 It was a very long time ago.
 
 Mrs. Manheim is in the dark about her husband's work. And he may never come out of the state he's in. What have you found out?
 Reflecting what?
 
 Is this "beam" responsible for the jolt we just felt?
 
 To the point, Mister Data.
 How far did he get?
 
 There is an elaborate defense system to protect his work.
 Agreed. Take a small away team. See what you can find down there.
 
 I don't care if you have a signal or not -- bring them back!
 ... Lock on, man. Beam them back!
 
 Medical Emergency Team in Transporter Sixteen.
 
 Good God, what happened out there?
 One at a time.
 Stop! I'll wait for Lieutenant Worf.
 I'll see you all in my Ready Room.
 A dragon?
 You each experienced something different and it affect you in dissimilar ways.
 However interesting this may be, it is not, as far as I can tell, bringing us any closer to closing that damn window.
 
 Check and re-check all the sensor readings that were taken while you were "out there."
 
 Number One, are you clear-headed enough to do some research?
 Good, then go over all the material that Mister Data collected on Manheim's various theories. Maybe you'll be able to see something that ties in. Something that explains the experience you just had.
 Lieutenant Worf... go to your quarters and rest...
 That's an order. There will be plenty of "dragons" left when you awaken.
 This has nothing to do with their subconscious fears and dreams?
 That's what I was afraid you'd say, Counselor.
 
 Professor Manheim.
 We need your help. The situation is not good.
 We intend to. What exactly were you working on when this window to another dimension was opened?
 We are not totally without resources.
 
 What about time_gravity?
 I'd rather hear it from you personally, a condensed version.
 
 So -- this energy, directed into space, then what?
 Fine. My scientific knowledge isn't the issue here -- yours is. You opened it. Are you brilliant enough to close it?
 Certainly hostility.
 Yes, Counselor, let's stick to the important issues. Lieutenant Worf.
 I want every heading that Manheim gave Mister Data checked out and then rechecked. No one's beaming down to Vandor until we can be reasonably sure they'll make it through.
 
 I'll be in my quarters, Number One.
 
 
 
 I wondered when you would come.
 
 
 You are so beautiful, my throat feels as if it will close and I will never be able to tell you how beautiful you truly are.
 
 Fear. Fear of losing you. Fear of staying and losing myself.
 
 My love. I cannot live without you.
 
 How soon, Mister Data?
 
 On my way, Doctor.
 
 You asked for me.
 
 I did not come here to discuss her. I will not discuss her with you until your irresponsible actions are checked and until my away team is back on this ship safe and sound.
 Then she is wrong. We are very different, you and I. For which I am grateful.
 
 Contact the away team!
 Maintain an open frequency, Number One.
 No, Commander. Doctor Crusher is under orders to inform me if the professor regains consciousness. (beat) What's the problem?
 Explain.
 I'd like to wake him up myself.
 You've got seven minutes. I don't care what you've found or what you're doing, clear?
 And?
 In magnitude, in energy mass, in composition?
 Are you saying it could arbitrarily, or even with fine methodology, change direction and instead of blasting us, draw us in... suck us through the window?
 Proceed, and report at regular intervals.
 Away team, report.
 You've got three minutes, no more. Transporter Room, lock onto their coordinates and be ready to beam them up the instant of my command.
 You haven't got it.
 Beam them back.
 
 I'm sure the Federation will want to help you in any way they can, as long as you are willing to now be a part of the Federation.
 The science team will be arranged.
 
 
 I know.
 You have more courage than I did.
 I eat, sleep and dream your softness -- could it be enough?
 
 I cannot say good-bye to you.
 Is anything wrong?
 Then set course for Sarona Eight. As I remember we were on our way for some much needed R and R.
 Warp five. Engage.
 
 It's called the Blue Parrot Cafe -- and you're buying.
 What is it, Number One?
 Pipe it through.
 Understood.
 Picard, Jean-Luc. Captain, USS Enterprise.
 (half-whisper) Walker...
 Too long, my friend. Why are you contacting me on this frequency?
 Risk?!
 I don't understand.
 You're using a Code Forty-Seven! I have to know what this is all about.
 For God's sake Walker, you know this is a secure channel --
 (thinking it over) When?
 Impossible. We're expected at Pacifica --
 What is?
 Walker --
 (to Geordi) Are you familiar with Dytallix B, Lieutenant?
 Fine. Chart a course for it immediately, warp seven. And there will be no records or logs mentioning any aspect of this diversion.
 -- Negative, Will. Nothing goes out without specific orders from me.
 Hopefully our delay will be minimal.
 Very good, Number One. I'm on my way.
 Identify.
 You will make no further attempts, Mister Worf. Any life-form readings on the surface, Mister Data?
 (moving toward turbolift) Very well. Relay those coordinates to the Transporter Room. I'm beaming down.
 Alone, Number One.
 This is some greeting, "old friend."
 On Tau Ceti III. It was a bar -- Quite an exotic one at that. (looks at Bolian) What do I win?
 You know full well I hadn't even met Beverly then. You introduced them.
 (losing patience) You don't have a brother -- two sisters, Anne and Melissa. Now what the hell's this all about?!
 Walker, what's going on?
 I believe we've met... The Altairian conference?
 Tryla Scott. It's said you made captain faster than anyone in Starfleet history, present company included. (pause) Are you that good?
 Starfleet's finest. (looks around shaft) Fancy meeting you here.
 What threat?
 (thinking about it) No. We've been on the outer rim for awhile. Haven't had much contact with them.
 (quietly stunned) All dead?
 (incredulous) Targeted for what? By whom?
 (turning, angry) You've given me nothing to believe in! Just vague talk of wild schemes. Who's behind it, and for what purpose? How are people being changed?
 (exasperated) Walker --
 That's sound advice at any time, Captain.
 Friends... close friends, are few and far between. I'm a private man, Deanna. My Starfleet duties have shielded me from social circles. My two oldest and closest friends were Jack Crusher, may he rest in peace, and Walker Keel. Until various missions split us apart, we were almost inseparable. (pause) I trust Keel completely. If he felt it necessary to violate regulations, I know he must have a good reason.
 Isn't that what friendship's all about, Counselor?
 The people involved are all of the highest caliber. If I didn't believe in their loyalty, I wouldn't have gone this far.
 No. I won't risk implicating them. Not until we have solid evidence that something really is wrong.
 (moving to Command) Take us out of orbit, Mister La Forge.
 Resume heading to Pacifica, warp factor eight.
 Very well. Data, I have an assignment for you. One especially suited to your talents.
 Yes. He asked me to say hello to you.
 (stern) -- That wasn't possible, Doctor.
 Specify. What kind of disturbance?
 Yes. Let's investigate. Maintain speed and alter course accordingly.
 Slow to impulse, Mister La Forge.
 On screen.
 (concerned) Agreed. (to Worf) Enlarge and identify.
 Any identifying marks, Worf?
 Captain's personal log, stardate 41776.1. The death of my friend Walker Keel, has had a powerful impact on me. I now believe there may be a cancer growing within the ranks of Starfleet.
 (continuing) I've decided to alert my executive officer to the suspicions voiced by Keel and the other two captains.
 The last time I saw Admiral Quinn he tried to warn me of a subversion inside the Federation. Then Walker tried, and now he's dead.
 I do not think the explosion of the Horatio was an accident. It was sabotage.
 What sort of activity?
 Can you speculate as to the purpose of these reassignments?
 Yes... (thoughtful pause) ... Why not indeed?
 (continuing) We're talking about a threat to the entire future of the Federation. I don't think any of us can rest easy until we've gone to the source.
 Captain's personal log, supplemental. We have altered course and are traveling toward Earth. I have apprised the remaining bridge crew of our situation.
 Standard orbit, Mister La Forge.
 Any word from Starfleet Command, Mister Data?
 Strange...
 On screen.
 Yes. Good to see you again, Admiral.
 Yes sir, I can imagine you would be.
 It is, sir.
 That... is something I'd rather discuss in person, Admiral.
 On the surface. Any thoughts counselor?
 (smiling after a brief hesitation) We accept your gracious offer.
 Fine.
 Of course. Looking forward to seeing you. Enterprise out.
 (quietly to Riker) Quinn wants to see us alone -- at least we know he's still on our side.
 Welcome aboard, Greg. You remember Commander Riker.
 I must say, you're looking well.
 Last time we met you told me how tired you'd been feeling.
 Remember what you told me back at Relva 7? About the threat you perceived to the very fabric of the Federation?
 That's one of the reasons.
 (quietly) I'm sorry... I must have misunderstood.
 (softly, thoughtful) Of course.
 (still a bit dazed) I should be getting down to the planet. Commander Riker will be at your disposal to show you anything you'd like to see.
 -- I insist. (to Riker) You can join me on Earth when the admiral's tour is completed.
 (eyes narrowing) Of course, Admiral. Stay as long as you wish.
 (adamant) That's not Gregory Quinn. He may look like him and sound like him... but it isn't him.
 I am certain, Number One. I want you to go back to that cabin and keep your eye on his every move. Have Beverly concoct a reason for a complete medical examination.
 I don't care how! Just do it! Use force if necessary.
 (grasping Riker's shoulders) It's not him, Will. I know that now. What we need to find out is how he's been duplicated. (pause) And who or what's behind it.
 -- I am right.
 I'll take care. Find out what you can, and then join me -- in force if you believe it's warranted. (nods at Riker) Energize.
 Thank you, sir. My first officer will be joining us shortly.
 I'm honored. (pause) Tell me, why is it so quiet here? The last time I saw this corridor it was bustling with activity.
 I see you keep up with our duty roster.
 I'd like to begin the discussion of why I'm here.
 It's interesting you mention the Horatio. That's one of the things I wanted to discuss.
 Has the cause of her destruction been ascertained?
 (surprised by the question) Not nearly enough I suppose.
 I'd like to contact my ship. To inform Commander Riker that we're ready to sit down.
 Picard to Riker.
 (looking around) I suppose we have no choice. Where's Riker?
 Specify, Doctor.
 Any idea what it is or where it comes from?
 Continue, Doctor.
 -- Spare me the medical details, Doctor. Just tell me if you can remove it.
 Doctor, one does not beam into Starfleet Headquarters armed.
 About to go to dinner now, Doctor. Have Riker join me when he's available. Picard out.
 (shellshocked) What exactly is your race? Where do you come from?
 Aaron!
 (to Riker) Come on!
 -- Remmick!
 No, Will!
 Captain's log, stardate 41780.2. Admiral Quinn is expected to make a full recovery...
 (continuing) There is no trace of the parasite which took control of him. We'll never know how many of these life-forms infiltrated Starfleet, but it seems they could not survive without the "mother creature" which had taken over Commander Remmick...
 (continuing) ... Still, the haunting question remains... Who were these beings... and will we ever have to face them again?
 That it did, Number One. Rest assured.
 (half-whisper) A beacon?
 Enterprise, this is the captain. Number One, I want to get underway as soon as the shuttle is secure.
 Number One, I want a meeting on the Observation Deck. Mister La Forge, set course zero-five-eight, mark nine-seven-three.
 That's correct Mister La Forge, warp factor eight.
 Engage. Mister La Forge, you have the bridge.
 Two Federation outposts in Sector three-zero have been destroyed. There has been no communication with any Federation starbases in Sector three-one since stardate 41903.2.
 That is the assumption.
 The question is: Why here? Why now? What's their objective, if indeed they have one? For half a century there's barely a whisper about them and now for no apparent reason they seem to be back with a roar. Why?
 The strategic decision is to send one ship.
 Yes.
 True enough -- it is a gamble.
 Prepare as always. If force is needed we will use it, but that will mean we have failed. Our goal here is to establish some kind of relations with the Romulans -- failing that -- to convince them of our resolve and to do this without resorting to force. Right now, the general feeling is that they are seeking a confrontation. They may want to test themselves in battle against a Federation starship to gauge how much we have advanced. Personally, I think it is possible they have different motives altogether based on needs which we have not identified. If that's the case... I must know it. (to Troi) Counselor -- I will need a complete profile on them.
 Data. Extrapolate for me the logical progression of their technical advancement; specifically, but not restricted to -- weapons.
 (to everybody) I want this thought through completely. Anticipate, as much as you can, all the possible permutations.
 (continuing) Computer, how long before we arrive at the Neutral Zone?
 We will reassemble in six hours. Let's be smart. No surprises. I would much rather outthink them, than outfight them. Questions?
 Thank you. (on Com) Doctor Crusher, this is the captain.
 I will be right there. (to Riker) Take the Conn, Number One. I won't be long.
 What is it, Doctor?
 Capsule? People? What people?
 I wasn't aware he had.
 You what?
 What's their condition?
 After they died?
 Well, for this group, apparently it worked.
 (continuing) Lieutenant Commander Data, please report to Sickbay -- immediately.
 I am never critical of any member of my staff being curious, but... the timing is just so...
 But, Data -- they were already dead. I mean... what more could have happened to them?
 You're right -- under the circumstances I would have done exactly the same.
 What are the options?
 They are alive now, so we have to treat them as living human beings.
 Well...
 (continuing) Then, there really is no choice.
 Before you wake them, I want Security here. (touching com) Mister Worf, report to Sickbay.
 ... Welcome to the twenty-fourth century.
 That sounds like someone who hated life -- yet he had himself frozen so presumably he could go through it all again.
 Doctor, this seems to be a situation more suited to your talents. I will leave it in your hands.
 (continuing) I'll be on the bridge.
 (to Riker) Number One, kindly take charge of our guests until we have time to decide what we are going to do with them.
 ... and keep them out of my way.
 Anything will help.
 (to himself) Counterpunches... (to Troi) Thank you, Counselor. This is quite helpful.
 Number One.
 Would you and Mister Data report to the bridge?
 Report.
 How many outposts are there in this sector?
 Continue, Number One.
 The Enterprise?
 And your recommendation.
 Data.
 This is the captain, to whom am I speaking?
 What's going on here, Number One? Did you give him permission to contact me?
 Listen, Mister Offenhouse. We are in a very important conference right now and...
 Data -- identify -- what's the Q-E-Two?
 He's comparing the Enterprise to a cruise ship.
 I am Captain Picard.
 Indeed we will. Those com panels are for official ship business.
 Aboard a starship, that is not necessary. We are all capable of exercising self-control. You will refrain from using them.
 We are involved in a very serious and potentially dangerous situation.
 I do not think you are fully aware of your situation, or the time which has passed.
 Your lawyer has been dead for centuries.
 That's what this is all about... A lot has changed in three hundred years. People are no longer obsessed with the accumulation of "things". We have eliminated hunger, want, the need for possessions. We have grown out of our infancy.
 Power to do what?
 That kind of control is an illusion.
 (turning to her) What is it?
 Counselor Troi, report to the guest lounge.
 Slow to impulse... I'm on my way.
 I will inform her.
 It's the first thing you've said that I do understand. I'll see what I can do. But please... stay off the com panel.
 Counselor, get those people under control. We cannot afford this continuing distraction.
 Captain's log, supplemental. We have arrived at the edge of the Neutral Zone. We will now have an opportunity to learn firsthand what happened to our distant outposts.
 Can you determine what happened?
 Could it have been a natural phenomenon?
 Geordi, set a course for the next closest station.
 I appreciate your concern and advice, but this is not the time for rash actions. We are still investigating.
 (continuing) There are three other stations in this sector which we need to visit. Let's proceed in a calm and orderly manner.
 Yes, Number One. That would be prudent.
 Wait. If that is a Romulan ship, it will read our intent. We will be forcing them to take a similar posture. We are not out here to engage in battles; we are explorers.
 (to Data) Are your sensors picking up anything? You should be detecting a disturbance.
 (to Riker) They were trying to determine our intent... They wanted to see if we would fire.
 On screen.
 Stay calm, everyone.
 Lieutenant, keep your emotions under control. Open hailing frequencies.
 Romulan vessel, this is Captain Jean-Luc Picard of the USS Enterprise.
 But they have not fired.
 (continuing) Let's try them again.
 Romulan vessel, this is Captain Jean-Luc Picard of the USS Enterprise.
 You have crossed the Neutral Zone. This is Federation territory.
 It could be viewed as an act of aggression.
 Lieutenant Worf's question is valid.
 Do you think we attacked your outposts?
 Who is responsible?
 Yes, but correct in his assessment.
 I would like to offer a proposal.
 Nothing so grandiose -- just this. Cooperation... whoever or whatever did this is more powerful than either of us.
 We have made some progress in our relations... let's not ruin that with unnecessary posturing.
 I think our lives just became a lot more complicated.
 Get him off my bridge.
 Here is what I propose. You can't remain on the Enterprise. We have arranged to rendezvous with the USS Charleston, bound for Earth. You will be delivered there.
 (amused) This is the twenty-fourth century. Those material needs no longer exist.
 To improve yourself... enrich yourself. Enjoy it, Mister Offenhouse.
 Perhaps so, anything is possible.
 Your point, Lieutenant?
 They will benefit from the extended time. It will allow them to acclimate before arriving at Earth.
 That would take us in the wrong direction. Our mission is to go forward and it has just begun. Set velocity at warp six, Mister La Forge.
 There is still much to do... and still so much to learn. (pause) Mister La Forge... Engage.
 Come.
 Very good. Take a look at the containment module our new chief engineer has designed.
 How long will we be on impulse power?
 I will relieve you at zero three zero zero.
 Captain's log, Stardate 42073.1. There has been an outbreak of a yet unclassified Plasma Plague in the densely populated Rachelis system. We are on an emergency run to a Federation Research station on 'aucdet Nine, where specimens of Plasma Plague are kept. We will then transport that deadly cargo to Science Station Tango Sierra, where hopefully an antidote can be manufactured. Every hour we delay, thousands die.
 Number One.
 Mister Data, when we receive a complete list of all the specimens we will be carrying, I want you and Doctor Pulaski to go through it... by the way. Where is our new doctor? Has she reported in?
 Sickbay, this is the captain.
 Is Doctor Pulaski there?
 What?! (surprised, then annoyed) A few hours on board and she's already found Ten-Forward.
 No, Number One. I'll go.
 (a greeting) Ensign Crusher.
 I'm sorry this mission will delay your reunion with your mother.
 (dismissive) We shouldn't be more than a week or so.
 Mixed feelings for all of us.
 (continuing) It's always difficult leaving any ship, as it was for your mother when she left to become head of Starfleet Medical. But going from one assignment to another is part of the life which you are choosing.
 Truly.
 (greets her) Guinan.
 Where's Doctor Pulaski?
 Doctor Katherine Pulaski?
 Doctor -- protocol on your last assignment might have been lax, but here on the Enterprise...
 (he touches his communicator) Lieutenant La Forge, status report.
 Take us to warp six as soon as possible.
 This is Doctor Katherine Pulaski. We will handle the formal introduction later.
 (continuing) Counselor Deanna Troi is pregnant.
 A life-form of unknown origin and intent is breeding right now inside Counselor Troi. Our purpose here is to determine what is to be done about this very "unusual" situation. Discussion.
 Doctor, is that your recommendation?
 I believe that ends the discussion.
 Captain's log, supplemental. We have finally arrived at 'aucdet Nine. We will pick up the specimens of Plasma Plague and transport them to Rachelis.
 (continuing) It is only because so many lives are at stake that I am willing to put this ship and crew at such great risk.
 How are you feeling?
 Open hailing frequencies.
 'Aucdet Nine, this is Captain Jean-Luc Picard of the USS Enterprise.
 Excuse me, to whom am I speaking?
 Are the specimens ready for transfer?
 I appreciate your caution -- in the same vein, I need a complete, detailed manifest of everything which you intend to bring on board my ship.
 (to Data) Download the inventory and go through it with Doctor Pulaski. (to Riker) Number One, arrange to have Hester Dealt transported up.
 It's been fourteen hours since we arrived at 'aucdet Nine. Hester Dealt is making final selections of the specimens we will carry. Meanwhile, we continue to receive desperate pleas from the Rachelis System.
 At last. Review it with Doctor Pulaski. I want both of you to be completely familiar with it.
 Picard here.
 Counselor, my best wishes to you and your son.
 Welcome to the bridge, Doctor. How's Counselor Troi? Did she have a good night?
 I'm not sure of your point.
 (to Data) How long before we are ready to begin the transfer?
 (he stands) You have the Conn, Number One.
 Doctor, you would accompany me, please. I think it's time I paid my respects.
 I wanted to come by and see how you were and have a look at your...
 (continuing) ... baby! My goodness.
 (continuing) How old is he?
 Yes, but...
 You mean he can talk?
 Hello, Ian.
 Captain's log, supplemental. We are faced with two major problems: Troi's child and the deadly cargo we are about to load, which is so desperately needed in the Rachelis system. In the hours since his birth, Troi's baby has continued to age and now appears, physically and mentally, to be a child of eight. And still there is no indication as to who he is, or why he is here.
 Picard here.
 Enlighten me.
 I understand, Doctor. Do you have a recommendation?
 Thank you, Doctor. Commander Data, if you have completed your review, you are needed in Transporter Room Three.
 No, Ian, but thank you for the invitation.
 No, I have never played with puppies.
 Perhaps later.
 Yes, for the experience.
 Ian, could you tell us why you are here?
 No, I mean... why you are here on this ship?
 I hope he will tell us soon.
 I'm on my way, Number One. (to Troi) Keep me apprised of his progress, Counselor.
 Take us out of orbit, Number One -- then set a course for Rachelis -- warp nine.
 Yes, Lieutenant La Forge.
 How serious?
 Captain's log, supplemental. For reasons as yet unknown, one of the specimens of Plasma Plague is growing.
 I don't see how that would be possible.
 Impulse velocity.
 Report, Mister La Forge.
 Granted.
 Doctor Pulaski.
 We are having some difficulties on Cargo Deck Five -- your presence is requested.
 Mister Crusher, report to the bridge.
 Take the Conn, Mister Crusher.
 (continuing) On this course -- increase velocity to warp nine.
 Make it so.
 Thank you, Lieutenant.
 Apparently so.
 Standard station approach, Mister Crusher.
 Transporter Room Three, this is the captain. We have arrived. Let's make this transfer with all deliberate speed, and get on about our business.
 You have the bridge, Number One.
 Yes Ensign?
 In my Ready Room when your duties permit.
 Come.
 Yes, Ensign.
 Oh. Have you discussed this with your mother?
 Wes, it's a little more complicated than that.
 Make it so, Number One. (then to Wesley) Return to your position.
 Take us out of orbit, Mister Crusher and lay in a course for the Morgana Quadrant.
 (loud enough for everyone to hear) Mister Crusher has requested to remain on the Enterprise.
 I haven't as yet, Number One. I don't think it's my decision alone. His remaining will cause difficulties for us all.
 Exactly. That duty would fall to Commander Data.
 Then, Number One, that leaves you the task of guiding young Mister Crusher through his most hazardous journey -- from youth to man. Are you willing to serve?
 All right then. Mister Crusher, communicate with your mother at Starfleet Medical headquarters. Give her my regards and tell her you have my permission to remain on board the Enterprise.
 (continuing) But, that I will abide by her wishes.
 Now -- if you have course and speed laid in.
 Then, Mister Crusher -- engage.
 With reason.
 Both. (pauses) I think perhaps it is best to be ignorant of certain elements of the Klingon psyche.
 Captain's log, Stardate 42193.6. We are on a long reach toward the Morgana Quadrant, a section of the galaxy which has yet to be visited by a manned Federation vessel. We are using the time to further detail the charts of this region.
 On screen.
 I can't see anything. Magnify section two-eight-five.
 We're acquainted with the "wormhole" phenomenon. This appears quite different.
 What do sensors indicate?
 I'm sure you must mean it's empty of matter, Mister Data. There is always some energy form at work...
 (to Data) That is hardly a scientific observation, Commander.
 Counselor?
 "Similar" in even the slightest way.
 I believe we have time for a closer look, Number One.
 Scanning and recording as we go.
 Let's send a probe into it.
 (to Wesley) Close enough, Ensign. Hold this position.
 What happened, Data?
 (puzzled) Why?
 Explain.
 (continuing) This starship operates best, Mister Worf, when we all know what is on each other's minds.
 Launch another probe, Mister Worf. This time a Class One with full sensor array.
 (eyes Worf, then) Negative.
 Take us in, Mister Crusher. Thrusters only.
 Data?
 Number One?
 Data?
 All stations, report!
 Captain's log, supplemental. While exploring a strange area in space without any form of matter or energy...
 (continuing) ... a total void, we have unexpectedly seemed to enter it. Apparently we moved past its mysterious outer boundary.
 In which case, let's hold position for awhile, Number One. This is worth studying.
 (smiles) And that the sun revolved around the Earth...
 "Beyond this place there be dragons."
 Hello, Doctor. You've been briefed on what's happened?
 I wish I could say I did. (to Data) Increase magnification by ten.
 (continuing) By one hundred!
 Commander Data knows precisely what he is doing.
 Engineering!
 Lieutenant, are your systems functioning?
 Thank you, Lieutenant.
 Data?
 Speculate.
 For a later discussion. It's time we got on with our mission, Number One. Starfleet can send out a science vessel to investigate further. Let's move back out of this.
 Are the engines operating normally, Engineer?
 We're increasing to warp four, Engineer.
 We should be seeing stars by now, Data. How far have we come?
 Ensign Crusher?
 Full stop, helm.
 According to this we're well past the point we entered the void.
 Make it so, Data. Lock onto the beacon, and keep it dead astern.
 Dead ahead. Impulse power.
 Engineering, report.
 Prepare to increase to warp two.
 Identify.
 All stop; hold position again.
 Perhaps some answers at last. On screen.
 Hold for my orders.
 Warn them we'll return fire.
 Fire torpedoes.
 That was too easy.
 Specifics.
 Magnify.
 Open a hailing frequency, Data....
 Make a full scan.
 Can we be getting a false reading, Data?
 I'm not anything right now, Number One. I'm just a man looking for answers.
 Granted. Minimum complement.
 Captain's log, supplemental. We remain like a fly in amber trapped in the void. We have encountered a vessel which appears to be the USS Yamato. All its systems are shown as functioning, yet it seems devoid of life. Commander Riker is leading an away team -- hopefully the answer lies over there.
 Number One, come in!
 (continuing) Transporter Room, this is the captain. We are out of contact with the away team. Beam them back, immediately.
 Transporter Room -- have you been able to establish a lock?
 Initiate full check -- all systems.
 On screen.
 Transporter Room. Do you have a fix on the away team?
 Haskell, lock on to the Yamato with the tractor beam. We leave together.
 Let it go, Data.
 Let it go.
 Transporter Room, hurry!
 Are you all right, Number One?
 Engage.
 What?
 On screen.
 Set a course for those stars. Warp six.
 All stop.
 I know Data, I can see it.
 Hold this position. (to Troi) Counselor, you have said you sensed no intelligence behind all of this. You haven't changed in that belief?
 Perhaps a different level of consciousness?
 Explain.
 Are you suggesting we're in some kind of laboratory?
 We're finished with being led about this way.
 I am Captain Jean-Luc Picard of the USS Enterprise. (firmer now) ... representing a Federation of planets in this part of the galaxy. (waits) Can you identify whoever or whatever you are?
 We've still no idea of what you represent.
 It is the way in which we propagate our species.
 Whatever you are, your actions are not welcome.
 What information do you want? I don't understand the question.
 We cannot allow you to do that! We'll fight you...
 Captain's log, Stardate 42194.7. It is obvious that whatever we have met sees no value in our kind of life-form. How do we fight something that both is...
 (continuing) ... and is not there?
 Is there any reason for not believing this Nagilum?
 Agreed. Under the circumstances -- there is only one decision. I will not stand by and watch while half of my crew is slaughtered.
 No. But I can control it.
 By destroying the Enterprise.
 Initiate auto-destruct sequence.
 Stand by. (turns to Riker) Interesting question. How long to prepare to die?
 The latest program allows it.
 (continuing) Initiate auto-destruct in twenty minutes.
 Come.
 (somewhat surprised) You didn't mention you were that certain.
 Yes? Come in, please.
 You've picked probably the most difficult of all questions, Data.
 (continuing) Some explain it by inventing gods wearing their own form... and argue that the purpose of the entire universe is to maintain themselves in their present form in an Earth-like garden which will give them pleasure through all eternity. And at the other extreme, assuming that is an "extreme," are those who prefer the idea of our blinking into nothingness with all our experiences, hopes and dreams only an illusion.
 Considering the marvelous complexity of our universe, its clockwork perfection, its balances of this against that... matter, energy, gravitation, time, dimension, pattern, I believe our existence must mean more than a meaningless illusion. I prefer to believe that my and your existence goes beyond Euclidian and other "practical" measuring systems... and that, in ways we cannot yet fathom, our existence is part of a reality beyond what we understand now as reality.
 (interrupting) Yes, this is very wrong. None of you should be reacting like this.
 Computer, locate Commander Data.
 It's not going to work, Nagilum.
 Hold, Number One.
 Hold.
 Data, on any heading -- warp six -- now!
 I don't believe it, Number One. It could still be part of the illusion. Data, report.
 Troi?
 Abort auto-destruct sequence.
 A simple "yes" would have been sufficient, Number One.
 Well, Nagilum... I hope you got what you needed.
 Why did you release us? You could have seen how we faced death.
 I'm not interested.
 During this period, you too have been evaluated. It would seem we have at least one thing in common.
 Curiosity.
 Then perhaps we'll meet again. But next time, it will be out here among the stars.
 Put us back on course, at warp three.
 Captain's log, Stardate 42486.3. We have arrived on station at coordinates -- three-six-two- nine-mark-five-eight-four, three days early for our rendezvous with USS Victory. There is nothing to do now, but hold this position and wait.
 Data, and Geordi (the latter two still in Victorian costume) -- he is holding Moriarty's sketch of the Enterprise in his hands.
 Computer. Tell me. Why wasn't the Holodeck program terminated?
 On whose authority?
 Tell me again -- exactly what happened.
 And you asked the computer to provide one.
 Worthy of Holmes?
 (in French) Terrible!
 I understand, Lieutenant. Well, at least now we have part of an explanation. The computer is not trying to confound "Holmes," which would be relatively easy, it has been ordered to create an adversary to defeat Data.
 So he is able to access the computer.
 Theorize, Data. What are his limits?
 What does he need to begin making use of that?
 Computer, locate Doctor Pulaski.
 And her vital signs?
 Counselor Troi, have you a sense of our opponent?
 And Doctor Pulaski?
 Exactly what?
 Computer -- what happened?
 Data -- I think it's best if you and I returned to the Holodeck.
 No -- I'll change into an appropriate costume. It seems he feeds on knowledge. Let's not give your nemesis any more information than we have to.
 Nice suit.
 Shall we sally forth, Mr. Holmes? (to computer) Computer tell me, is the program still running?
 Open.
 (continuing) We don't have much time. He is getting more control of his environment. Come on, let us see if we can't beat Professor Moriarty by giving him absolutely everything he wants... and then some.
 Obviously, he's attempting to alter the programming here.
 Tuppence -- two pence. (placing it in his pocket) A sign of good luck. We may need some...
 Data!
 It's more serious than that. I think the mortality failsafe has been circumvented. He could have killed me.
 I don't know.
 Take his knife and let him go, Data.
 Moriarty is making it very easy for us to find him.
 Granted.
 How will it affect a character like Moriarty?
 (to Pulaski) Are you all right?
 You two have gotten awfully...
 Moriarty, you were conjured up to attempt to defeat Holmes here... and once that attempt is concluded -- win or lose -- your program has run its course, your existence is done.
 Yes -- I know that, Moriarty, but you haven't. You shook this ship because you wanted to get my attention -- you have it. So what is it you want?
 That... may not be completely true, Professor. This... which we call our "Holodeck" makes use of the same principle in another of our devices called a "transporter." By the year in which we live, humans have discovered that matter and energy are interchangeable. On this Holodeck energy has been converted to matter and thus you have substance, but only here.
 You are not alive, Moriarty, as I said you are only...
 Yes.
 No. He is more.
 That's one possible definition.
 I'm responsible for the safety of this vessel and crew.
 (gently) That may not be possible.
 I cannot give you what you want.
 That is true --
 And I do not want to kill you.
 Bridge, this is the Captain.
 Number One, the situation is under control.
 Professor Moriarty, this ship has vast, library memory capacity.
 We will save this program of you. You will not be extinguished. We will save every aspect of you that exists now. And I promise you we will try to discover a way to bring you back in a form capable of leaving the Holodeck.
 As you wish. A short good-bye. (toward arch) Computer, save this program... then discontinue it for now.
 No. He didn't.
 That he could leave the Holodeck.
 Doctor, even with all his assurances -- that character was still Professor Moriarty. I will need to know a lot more about him before I allow him loose on my ship; he has, after all, made his reputation through cunning and deceit.
 Data.
 Damaged?
 She's beautifully turned out, Lieutenant -- wonderful testimony to simpler times.
 Will she still sail?
 As will we.
 On my way, Number One.
 Captain's log, Stardate 42502.7. We are traveling in the Omega Twelve System traversing between a clustering of small planets that form the coalition of Madena VI.
 (continuing) Each of these planets is populated by separate humanoid people who co-exist and trade technology and minerals under a precarious but successful treaty.
 Captain's log, supplemental. We have just encountered and identified an interplanetary cargo vessel which is apparently in need of emergency assistance. We will make every effort to do so. (beat) Open hailing frequencies.
 This is the USS Enterprise. Captain Jean-Luc Picard, over.
 You were never considered a danger to us, Captain Okona.
 Main Viewer on.
 Counselor, can you read him?
 What form of assistance can we offer you, Captain?
 Estimate, Mister Data.
 Lieutenant Worf, prepare security procedures. (to Okona) We can accommodate you.
 Yes. Now please follow the directions of Commander Riker so our ship can get back to its normal routine.
 (continuing) Something funny, Commander Riker.
 (filtered) Lieutenant Commander Data, report to the Main Bridge immediately. I repeat, report to the Main Bridge immediately.
 Open hailing frequencies in all languages and on all channels.
 (somewhat puzzled) Phasers?
 It's too small of a craft to be of any threat to us. Do you agree, Lieutenant Worf?
 And I doubt that they are so primitive that they wouldn't know it. Ensign Crusher, reduce speed to allow them to overtake.
 They show a great deal of courage. Perhaps I would like to show them some respect, or perhaps I'm just curious.
 (covers a smile) That won't be necessary, Number One. But continue to hail them and prepare for a gentlemanly surrender if needed.
 On screen.
 I am Captain Jean-Luc Picard of the USS Enterprise... What is the reason for this aggressive approach?
 It was in need of emergency repairs. It was our obligation to assist.
 On what authority?
 What crimes?
 Another ship from Atlec?
 (to Debin) Hold your position, Mister Debin. (to Data) Cut off Main Screen.
 (continuing) Identify approaching craft.
 Open hailing frequencies.
 On screen.
 I am Captain Picard.
 Then you know that we intend no hostile interaction with either of you.
 The word "demand" has the tone of finality.
 (to Wesley) Mute the Main Viewer. (to Worf) Lieutenant Worf, Mister Okona to the Main Bridge immediately.
 Engage the screen. (to Kushell) The same "demand" has been made by the Atlec legation.
 (knowing) I'd rather you didn't escalate this situation any further.
 We do not intend for that to be at our hand. I will respond to your request shortly -- (then:) Main Viewer off.
 In there... We'll talk in there...
 Mister Okona, you were welcomed on board and given the security of this ship openly and without any undue investigation. In turn the only obligation we placed you under was that you do not come aboard the Enterprise under false pretenses. It seems that you did.
 No, you are free to interact with the members of the crew. First, I'm talking about a man named Debin. Are you familiar with him?
 Then perhaps you can explain why his spacecraft is prepared to attack us unless we give him custody of you.
 Then tell me why Kushell of the planet Straleb is demanding the same thing?
 And quite adamant. Now answer please. What crimes have you committed?
 Why do these men want you?
 You will say. You're on my ship.
 They are prepared to attack the Enterprise.
 Exactly. (studies Okona) Then perhaps you could give me some reasons as to why I should consider destroying these people to save you?
 Neither can I.
 Put Debin on screen.
 No. You've made your requests but you haven't told me why.
 I'm afraid that's not good enough.
 I do sympathize with you. If you will allow me just a little more time.
 What do you have to say about that Okona?
 Gentlemen if you please!
 (continuing) You will get my decision as soon as I can confer with my advisors and in the interest of maintaining peace I am jamming communications between your two ships. Picard out.
 Okona, Doctor, Counselor, Lieutenant Worf, Geordi, the conference room if you please. Have Doctor Pulaski join us...
 And yet it provides the possibility of even more violence.
 It's what I may have to do to them that concerns me. If I turn you over to Debin, I will have to deal with Kushell. If you go to Kushell, I will have Debin to administer to. Or perhaps both of them would decide to attack us. Fatalities could be total.
 I'm well aware of that, but it doesn't change anything. (beat) Are you innocent, Thadiun Okona?
 Then my predicament is confirmed.
 (reacts) Apparently you've never been concerned about making it easier on anyone... There are two men out there who do not consider this a joke and are willing to face death as a matter of honor. They should be respected, not laughed at.
 Only about what I think you are. What to do about it is still a problem.
 (beat) I don't like it.
 (a few beats) I know. It will be impossible to stall very long.
 (shrugging) Anything I have to.
 Heaven forbid.
 Engage Main Viewer.
 (continuing) Ah, gentlemen... If you'll just bear with me, I have a few questions.
 One moment please, gentlemen. Screen off.
 I've used every pretext I could think of. The result is they've aimed their full ordinance at us and are prepared to attack. I can't delay any longer.
 (reacts) We've gone over this before. I thought you made a decision.
 On screen.
 Yes, both of you are most adept at issuing warnings. (beat) Mister Okona has volunteered to deal with this himself.
 (to Okona) Benzan has a certain flair for the language that is similar to yours.
 You placed great faith in him.
 Okona defies even the science of mathematics.
 (caught up in it) Then tell him.
 Gentlemen, this is a matter to be settled between yourselves. I have only two words for both of you. (long beat) Picard out.
 (to Riker) Take over, Will. Mister Okona and I are going to drink a toast to the newlyweds.
 I think it turned out to be "my pleasure," Mister Okona.
 Stretched to the limit with you, but thankfully still present. I think I might miss your presence, but I would like it to remain a fond memory.
 Good-bye Captain Okona.
 Please...
 Any response from Gravesworld, Mister Worf?
 What's our e.t.a. at the planet, Mister Crusher?
 You understand the importance of doing everything we can for Doctor Graves.
 Starfleet Command believes his work in quantum physics is reaching a critical stage. They consider this a priority one action.
 On screen, Mister Worf.
 Try and raise her, Mister Crusher. Tell them we're minutes away.
 Pipe it through, Mister La Forge.
 And what about Graves?
 He's the man we came to assist! I have my orders, Doctor.
 (nodding, thoughtful) Mister Crusher, make it so -- prepare for extended touch and go orbit.
 The transport may be a bit tricky. I'd like you to handle it, Mister La Forge.
 Assemble an away team, Number One. Include whatever medical assistants the Doctor deems necessary.
 -- Thank you Doctor, but I'll make those decisions. (pause) You're going to Gravesworld.
 Go ahead, Number One.
 Use caution and investigate. Protect Graves' health at all cost. We're leaving orbit to assist the Mary Rogers. Back as soon as possible.
 Captain's log, Stardate 42437.7. We've successfully transported the passengers and crew of the stricken liner Mary Rogers.
 (continuing) Tragically, six people died in the initial explosion, but the rest are now aboard and in good condition. We are heading back to Gravesworld with great dispatch.
 (still staring at space) Yes Ensign. I assume you would very much like to meet Doctor Graves.
 -- Good, I get the idea. Providing his health is reasonably intact, I'm going to appoint you as his personal tour guide when he comes aboard. You have the run of the ship -- show him anything you think he'll find interesting, and for heaven's sake, don't talk his ear off!
 -- Graves has a reputation for being difficult and I'm not sure I have the patience for that right now.
 (continuing) And... sometimes the very old get along best with the very young.
 I'm very sorry, Ms. Brianon. I'm sure this is quite difficult for you.
 Where's Data?
 Hmm, I suppose I can understand that. (to Pulaski) I think we should immediately transport to the ship. There are patients from the Rogers who could use some of your medical savvy.
 Nothing serious. (to Kareen) But I'd also like to get Doctor Graves to a place where we can make him more comfortable.
 Explain yourself, Data.
 Captain's log, Supplemental. I leave Gravesworld with an empty feeling and the knowledge that our mission was unsuccessful. Whatever scientific secrets Ira Graves was about to unlock will follow him to his grave...
 (continuing) Our immediate priority is to reach the nearest starbase so that Graves' assistant and the marooned settlers can get on with their lives.
 And he really believed he could transfer his intellect into a computer?
 Data... I realize you liked Doctor Graves a great deal.
 Does his death disturb you?
 Yes of course.
 I told you we would, Data.
 Hmm?
 What is it?
 -- You wish to attend.
 I think it's a fine idea. Come along, Wes.
 Are we the first?
 Very good. (to computer) Enter.
 You don't seem yourself lately. Are you feeling all right?
 Well what is it then?
 If you promise to be brief. When I agreed to this, I didn't intend for it to interfere with our duties. Understood?
 Data...
 Data! That's enough!
 You are finished, you mean.
 What's become of your judgment?
 Do you consider it mature to program the mountains to tremble every time you say the name, Ira Graves?
 (continuing) Not to mention the air warming at the very thought of him. We would've been barbequed if we'd stayed much longer.
 Data --
 I know that Data.
 (continuing) Look... I realize you've been studying the human equation with great alacrity, but maybe you've been trying just a little too hard. Do you know what I mean?
 (continuing) Try and relax a little. Don't try to be so... "human." Just be yourself. Okay?
 Could it be that grandfather analogy Graves planted in his head?. Data is an orphan in a manner of speaking. Maybe the loss of Graves really got to him. Touched him emotionally.
 It's Captain Picard and Commander Riker. May we come in?
 We've come to pay our respects, Miss Brianon.
 Oh yes. Closer than you've ever seen them before.
 I'm aware of your interest in science. Perhaps you'd like to --
 (sharply) What was that, Data?
 These are our science stations.
 (angry) Admit what, Mister Data?
 (controlling his temper) Mister Data, you are hereby relieved of duty -- Worf, take his station.
 You will report to your quarters immediately. You will not leave there until you hear otherwise from me. Is that understood?
 (to Kareen) Do you know what that was all about?
 (to Data) We're going to Sickbay.
 I'm getting there. Come along.
 Because I brought him to you. I want a complete medical check run on him immediately.
 -- I expect nothing less.
 I have the utmost faith in your abilities, Doctor. I know nothing will get by you.
 Wait for me in the corridor, Mister Data.
 (raising voice) You will wait for me in the corridor!
 (continuing) His insubordination is growing by leaps and bounds. I could throw him in the brig but I'd rather try and help him.
 Explain.
 It's safe to say you're his best friend. Can you speculate on what's happening to him?
 Yes...
 Make certain of what?
 What?! He's an android, that's not possible!
 (shocked whisper) So that's it...
 (lost in thought) Nothing. Go on.
 How do you mean?
 Where is he now, Counselor?
 Orders? Which personality will choose to obey my orders?
 (to computer) Tell me -- where is Lieutenant Commander Data?
 Yes. I realize that now.
 (into com) Security alert -- all decks. Lieutenant Commander Data may be armed and dangerous. Use extreme caution and subdue. All phasers on stun.
 Data. That's your best friend you're threatening. That's Geordi. You wouldn't harm him for the world, would you?
 You win -- no need to act rashly. Mister La Forge, you and the rest of the bridge crew will vacate immediately.
 You will make no attempt to recapture the bridge. Is that clear, Geordi?
 What is it you want? Tell me!
 (continuing) Kareen is with us! You want to talk to Kareen.
 -- He's taken over my ship! And I want her back! (pause) Are you going to help me?
 By rejecting him! By deflating his ego.
 It might be our only hope! He controls all life-support systems on this ship. He could start killing us like flies.
 Yes, I suppose I do understand.
 (grim, determined) To the bridge.
 You have no choice, Number One. Should I fail to return I want you to attempt an external bridge separation. Get all of our people as far away from him as possible.
 There's still some of Data inside. I know there is. If I can reach him, maybe we've still got a chance.
 I do know that. I also know you haven't killed anyone so far. I don't think you really want to.
 (continuing) Where are we going?
 Which is?
 Because you're lonely. Because you want someone else to share your plans.
 And what of Data? Your "grandson."
 You took advantage of him.
 You killed him! You're nothing but a two-bit murderer!
 -- I've heard more than enough to know you're you again.
 No Kareen. The real Ira Graves never left the planet.
 Captain's log, Stardate 42411.2. The Enterprise has been unexpectedly diverted to the Ramatis star system. The two sides of a bitter little planetary conflict have petitioned Starfleet to transport to their world a mediator they have mutually selected. Our orders are transportation only -- no interference, no responsibilities. It is a mission much to my liking.
 Come.
 Ah, Number One. Look at this. Ever since we left the Lima-Sierra system, I have been puzzling over how the third planet could maintain such an orbit, when it is theoretically impossible, but consider this.
 Exactly!
 I haven't got that worked out.
 Yes, somewhat, but if this is an accurate representation -- would it not explain what happened in that system?
 Well, not a matter of great moment -- just a knot I had to untie. Now... What was it you wanted to see me about?
 Ah -- well -- time to leave.
 This is not an away team in the strictest sense. I consider this more of a ceremonial function. For me not to go, could be construed a lack of respect, or that I do not regard the mission as significant. Transporter Room Five.
 I appreciate your concern, Number One, but, I'm sure it will go quite smoothly.
 They asked for the best and that person, from all reports, is Riva.
 I'm not surprised, he hasn't mediated for several decades.
 Yes, for all our sakes... let's hope Riva is at the top of his game.
 Very good, Lieutenant. Worry not, Number One -- this will be a simple ceremonial greeting, and right back to the Enterprise.
 Energize.
 We have arrived safely, Number One, and for the most part, we've been ignored... ah...
 ... some of the local citizenry are beginning to assemble. I'll keep you informed.
 Well, if they respect him on Solais, as much as they do here -- we could be looking forward to a successful mission.
 Counselor?
 No. But thank you for asking.
 Greetings from the United Federation of Planets. I am Captain Jean-Luc Picard, of the USS Enterprise. This is Counselor Troi, and Lieutenant Worf.
 Yes, so I see. I think there are facets to Riva about which we were not informed.
 So Riva the famous mediator is... ?
 (indicating Chorus) And you all speak for Riva?
 (to the Woman) And you...
 (to the Woman) Remarkable. How did this...
 What?!
 (to Riva) The uniqueness of this presentation provoked my inadvertent breach in protocol. No insult was intended.
 I was curious about how this unique form of communication came about.
 (to Riva) Your ability to read lips -- is very impressive.
 Your "translators" do not see you, yet they are able to accurately convey your thoughts.
 Riva -- if you are ready -- the situation at Solais Five is very critical. We should not delay.
 Are you all -- I mean -- Riva, did you plan to take these people with you?
 No, it's just that we didn't know you would all be coming.
 Make it so.
 Riva, may I present--
 These three -- speak for Riva.
 This is my first officer, Commander Riker.
 Lieutenant Commander Data.
 And our chief medical officer, Katherine Pulaski.
 This is Lieutenant La Forge.
 I will have you shown to you quarters, then at your convenience I have prepared a briefing on the Solari wars? I offer the hospitality of my ship during this journey. We will provide whatever is necessary to make you comfortable or to facilitate your mission.
 Exactly how will he do that?
 So that's how it work.
 Worf, could you provide an escort.
 Commander Data, would you please update the situation.
 That piece of information could be very useful. Data.
 Always?
 No. This is for your benefit.
 Then, by all means, meeting is adjourned.
 Cocky is the word I would have used.
 Open hailing frequencies.
 This is Captain Jean-Luc Picard, commander of the Federation starship USS Enterprise.
 (continuing) If you continue to violate the rules by breaking the cease-fire, I will abort this mission.
 Riva is in charge of the summit. I command the ship that brings him. I will not endanger my ship under any circumstances.
 (formal) I shall summon him for you.
 (continuing) Get Riva now!
 The cease-fire has been broken.
 On viewscreen.
 We are here to provide whatever service is necessary.
 Captain's log.
 So... communication between Riva and his Chorus was aided by this device. Without it...
 (to Riva) Can you fix it?
 (continuing) Can it be fixed?
 Lieutenant La Forge. See what you can learn about this. If it's possible to repair it, I need to know.
 I need your help.
 We need to communicate with him.
 (continuing) Surely you know sign language.
 And he neither reads nor writes.
 You'll be all right. Stay here. I'll send someone to look after you. Please... try to stay calm.
 Riva knows sign language.
 (to Data) Find a way to communicate with him. (to Worf) Take him to Sickbay. Doctor do what you can.
 (continuing) You are not alone. We will solve this together.
 (continuing) If Riva does not mediate this summit successfully, the Solari will destroy each other.
 It is not me they want. They believe in Riva. The problem is, he no longer believes in himself.
 (continuing) Keep me posted of Riva's progress. I'll be in my quarters.
 We have to find a way to talk to him.
 Captain's log, Stardate 42111.8. We are monitoring increased military activity on Solais Five. I fear that we will be unable to keep the Solari from destroying themselves without Riva and still he is silent.
 Come.
 How is our mediator?
 What can we do to help him?
 You're right, of course.
 (continuing) Come.
 Enough! (beat) Let's talk to Riva.
 Good news. Data has learned your language. He can translate for you at the summit.
 But your ability is unchanged. All that's different is the method of transmission.
 Data can understand you. Use him as your Chorus. Let him express your words.
 You've got to take advantage of what you've got...
 You're right. Maybe you are all show.
 (continuing) You hide behind your Chorus. (in his face) You're a fake.
 That's too bad. A lot of people are going to die.
 Data.
 We will return you to Ramatis.
 (continuing) ... but, first I am going to attempt to settle the conflict on Solais.
 We have come this far -- it would be difficult for me personally to leave without making the attempt.
 Help me.
 We all earn our reputations. Yours is that of a very successful negotiator -- a mediator.
 If there is one - yes.
 Simple enough to say - difficult to accomplish.
 Then why can't you turn your disadvantage into an advantage?
 I will contact those down on the planet. Tell them to prepare to begin discussions immediately.
 Set phasers on stun.
 (continuing) Energize.
 (to Data) Make it so.
 It could be a while before the emissaries arrive. They will be more cautious after the last incident.
 Riva is going to teach them sign language.
 As they learn how to communicate with Riva, they will be learning to communicate with each other.
 Time well spent.
 Enterprise -- two to beam up. (to Riva) Good luck.
 Captain's log, Stardate 42111.8. Personal comment. I am confident that Riva can help the Solari achieve a lasting peace. We will deliver his Chorus to Starbase Seven-One-Three so they can be returned to Ramatis.
 Come.
 Yes, Mister La Forge, something on your mind?
 What makes you unique isn't your blindness or your VISOR -- (searching for the words) To be special we don't need to do a damned thing. Just be what we are. (beat) There's only one Geordi La Forge. And I wouldn't want to run my ship without him.
 Dismissed.
 Alpha Delta Beta. A routine transport mission.
 Engage!
 Captain's log, Stardate 42303.7. The Enterprise is bound for Star Station India to rendezvous with a Starfleet courier.
 Hopefully the mission will provide an opportunity to evaluate our newest staff officer...
 In the short time she's been aboard, Doctor Pulaski has distinguished herself as a meticulous and competent physician. But can someone so focused on her own specialty also assume the broader duties of the ship's Chief Medical Officer?
 (to com panel) Picard.
 (to com panel) Sound emergency stations, and respond on the same frequency.
 Stand by, Doctor. Commander Data. Have we locked on to the signal yet?
 (to viewscreen) Lantree, this is Jean-Luc Picard of the USS Enterprise. What is the nature of your emergency?
 (to viewer) Lantree! Are you under attack?
 (to com panel) USS Lantree, this is the Enterprise, come in, Lantree.
 Replay that last transmission.
 (to Troi) Counselor?
 (to Riker) Number One?
 Alter course to intercept.
 Open hailing frequencies.
 Lantree, this is the Enterprise.
 Captain Telaka, this is Picard, USS Enterprise. Do you read me?
 Nothing?
 No battle damage.
 And no life signs.
 We're going to have to board her, Will.
 (smiling) Ensign?
 Perhaps you'd like to take a look from down here. (indicates the area in front of the  viewscreen)
 (from viewscreen) Enterprise here.
 What happened?
 (from com panel) How soon will you have an autopsy report, Doctor?
 Natural causes? What in nature could kill an entire crew at the same time?
 Doctor?
 Thelusian flu?
 Lieutenant Worf. You know what to do.
 (frowning) I was thinking of a quarantine.
 You'll con --
 Number One. Set course for Gagarin Four. Warp nine. We'll depart the moment our security officer returns.
 Open hailing frequencies.
 (to viewscreen) Darwin Station. This is Captain Jean-Luc Picard of the USS Enterprise, on course for Gagarin Four.
 Doctor, we encountered The Lantree a few hours ago. (beat) They lost all hands.
 Doctor Mandel! Did you hear what I said? The twenty-six men and women aboard the Lantree are all dead!
 (grave) I'm sorry. We'll lend any assistance we can, but I won't risk the lives of --
 I heard you Doctor. And I understand completely. We'll reach Gagarin Four in a little over three hours. Until then.
 Number One?
 Doctor?
 Counselor?
 We're always at risk, Doctor. You may proceed with your examination, but I shall demand positive proof that these children are harmless before placing the lives of my crew in jeopardy.
 (to com panel) Thank you, Mister Crusher. Standard orbit.
 Activate.
 Hold on that, Number One. Whoever they are, they're in stasis. Lieutenant Worf?
 (controlled) Or at least Doctor Mandel's vision of it.
 Are you absolutely certain they're safe?
 But how can we be --
 Then until we can answer that question, we can't --
 But the risk. The risk is --
 (to com panel) Commander Riker, assemble the bridge crew in the observation lounge in fifteen minutes. Doctor Pulaski has a proposal she'd like us to consider.
 And Doctor... I'm not one to discourage input, but I'd appreciate it if you'd at least let me finish my sentences once in a while.
 Doctor Pulaski's studies indicate the children are harmless. She believes the rest of the colony's children should be beamed aboard and transported to a new environment while there's still time to save them.
 As Geordi says, forcefields can fail. And until --
 You say you understand, Doctor, but I wonder if you do.
 If you can find a way to prove the children are biologically harmless without risking the crew, I'll do everything in my power to assist.
 I'm concerned about our CMO. (off Troi's look) She's absolutley obsessed with the medical viewpoint. She doesn't seem able to step back and see the overall picture.
 Come.
 (studies her) And you along with it.
 Doctor, you are the chief medical officer of the Starship Enterprise. You have a responsibility to this ship --
 The Starfleet guidelines about contact with quarantined --
 Request approved.
 Doctor, I can't condone the jeopardy you're assumming, but I recognize that you have satisfied my conditions.
 (from viewscreen) Doctor!
 (from viewscreen) Good lord!
 Energize. (noticing Riker) Glad you're here, Number One.
 (on viewscreen) We'll have a medical team waiting for you in the shuttle bay, Doctor.
 Doctor!
 I wish it were that simple, Will.
 I agree it seems insignificant,
 My authority flows from the chain of command. If you, or any other officer, have anything less than full confidence that your orders will be carried out, then my rank of Captain is meaningless.c
 Of course.
 (to com panel) Thank you, Mister Crusher. (to the group) The medical emergency at Darwin Station is ongoing. We'll continue to assist, but our immediate concern is the evacuation of our two officers. Anyone?
 Judging from what we saw on the Lantree, Doctor Pulaski may not be able to help herself.
 Precisely. We can't protect ourselves against the unknown. What we need is a filter that isn't bio-dependent.
 (to Geordi) Is that possible?
 Very well. Thank you Ensign... ?
 Never?
 (to com panel) Bridge. Signal the USS Repulse on the sub-space captain's priority channel.
 Tell me, Taggart. If she served you as well as you say, why did you let her go?
 (shocked) Extraordinary.
 Have you made any progress, Doctor Pulaski?
 (incredulous) I'm sure, but right now I'm concerned about you.
 (from viewscreen) No, Doctor. You and Commander Data belong here.
 (from viewscreen) Doctor...
 (angry) If I was certain we had tried absolutely every -- (he's thinking) Stand by.
 Good to see you, Data.
 Tell me quickly -- you were unaffected because you have no genetic material?
 And Doctor Pulaski's DNA is altered -- and that's what brings on the aging?
 Come on. We've got one more card to play.
 Ensign, I need your opinion.
 You said the transporter could be altered to filter out changes in Doctor Pulaski.
 Well it turns out the changes are in her DNA. If we used a sample of the doctor's DNA -- say from a blood test -- that was taken before --
 You're picking up some bad habits, Ensign, but yes, you took the words right out of my mouth. (beat) Can you make the modifications?
 Make it so.
 Darwin Station, this is the Enterprise.
 (to viewscreen) We may have come up with an answer, Doctor. We're looking for a sample of your normal DNA to use as a filter. We think we'll be able to transport you while cancelling out any changes that have taken place.
 Doctor... you should know. This has never been done before. Are you willing to chance it?
 (beat) I'll operate the transporter myself.
 I'm afraid it is. If something should go wrong. If Doctor Pulaski is not fully... restored.
 (nods) In that event there should be time to redirect the transporter and... disperse her. It's not a responsibility I can delegate.
 You seem to have absolute faith in the ensign's work.
 Very well, then. (to com panel) Engage forcefield.
 (to com panel) Doctor Pulaski, are you ready?
 Welcome aboard, Doctor.
 (clears his throat) It would have been necessary to beam your energy into empty space. (beat) Happily, there's no reason to concern yourself with --
 Engage.
 Acknowledged, Number One.
 Commander Riker, report to the Phaser Range, please...
 I was wondering if you had any feelings about the Officer Exchange Program that has been initiated by Starfleet Command.
 That's a Benzite trait. (beat) It's been suggested that one of the officers on the Enterprise might like to participate in this exchange program.
 There's a Klingon vessel in the vicinity.
 Neither have I.
 Having Worf on board certainly has been.
 I was going to ask for a volunteer.
 What was that, Number One?
 Any particular reason?
 I'll notify starbase of your acceptance... They'll contact the Klingon vessel and make the arrangements.
 Captain's log, stardate 42606.5. I have informed the staff of Commander Riker's temporary duty assignment and we have departed from Starbase one-seven-nine and are headed for a rendezvous with the Klingon vessel, the Pagh.
 I understand the theory of the feast before the transfer. I've done the same thing dozens of times. However, I usually made more civil choices.
 I see... Well, their food may be somewhat backward but the Klingons are efficient, loyal to their beliefs, and are regulated by a strict code of ethics.
 But they are pure in that tradition.
 This is a great opportunity, Number One. We really know so little about them. We have so much to learn. (beat, smile) I think I envy you, Will Riker.
 Hailing frequencies open.
 On viewscreen.
 I am Jean-Luc Picard, captain of the Enterprise.
 We are preparing to do so. You're getting a good man, Captain Kargan.
 Transporter Room, prepare to beam Commander Riker aboard the Pagh.
 Good Luck, Commander.
 On your command, Will.
 Take over Commander Data, I'll be in my quarters.
 (distracted) Yes, of course. Nice to have you on board.
 I'm sure you do Ensign, you have an excellent record. However, on the Enterprise we use the chain of command. You may report your observations to Lieutenant Worf.
 No need to apologize Ensign... we should have explained it better during indoctrination.
 Zero in on that location and define.
 Analyze.
 Determine origin.
 (reacts) And you informed no one?
 You are supposed to report whatever is out of the ordinary. This falls into that category.
 It is our procedure for you to bring to the attention of command any possibility of danger. You will not make those decisions. (beat) Is that clear, Ensign Mendon?
 Fine. Now I want you to complete the analysis and determine the danger not only to this ship but the Klingon vessel as well.
 You'll remain at your station until it is complete, then report to me. Lieutenant Worf will supervise you.
 And the Klingon ship, the Pagh?
 Project your calculations.
 Signal them at once and advise them. Change our course to attempt an intercept. We will make every attempt to cleanse the vessel and assist with repairs.
 Then start immediately. Alert Engineering of this situation. Ensign Crusher, adjust course toward the proper sector.
 Yes... (beat) ... and hope that we get there in time.
 Continue to transmit.
 Begin intensive scan for debris. Conduct a thorough search of the area.
 Go ahead, Ensign.
 Spare me the technical details... just the results.
 (relieved, but covers) Thank you Ensign, well done. Prepare whatever procedures are necessary. (to Worf) Lieutenant Worf, add this information to hailing messages.
 Captain's log, supplemental, Stardate 42608.2. Although our search has been extensive, we are still unable to locate the Klingon ship or any debris. The absence of both leaves us puzzled and somewhat tentative.
 Agreed.
 (thoughtful for a beat) Make it so.
 (touches com link) Chief O'Brien, align with emergency transponder signal.
 We may have to stretch it a little. On my command.
 Transporter Room, ready. You will control defensive shields...
 Transporter Room, energize.
 Hold position. Hailing frequencies open. (beat) Calling the Pagh. This is the Enterprise. We are here to assist you. Do not fire.
 Pagh... Do you read me??
 Lower shields. (beat) Surrender as ordered.
 (nods) Transporter Chief, prepare to beam Captain Kargan aboard the Pagh. (to Riker, who has heard) Captain Riker, preparations are ready for immediate repairs to your ship.
 You're wrong, Number One... it was almost the longest. (beat) You did well.
 Apparently not how to duck.
 If that was the intention... Welcome aboard.
 Captain's log, stardate 42523.7. We are in route to newly established Starbase one-seven-three for port call. Crew rotation is scheduled, and we will offload experiment modules.
 (with a little edge on the words) My God, if it isn't Phillipa Louvois, back in uniform.
 Unbelievable, after all this time, and we're picking up the threads of old fights as if we'd never been apart.
 What are you doing out here?
 Anything is possible. You returned to Starfleet.
 You didn't have to leave.
 No. That was your own damn stubborn pride.
 No, you went way beyond doing the job. You enjoyed it.
 Flummery, you've always enjoyed the adversarial process more than arriving at the truth.
 (continuing) Well, I hope you've learned a little wisdom.
 (forcing a smile, and we see the tension leech from his body) I'm not being self-righteous. Merely right.
 Come and sit down.
 But he hasn't arrived yet.
 Past experience.
 I thought you were meeting someone?
 Admiral, Commander Maddox, allow me to introduce my first officer, Commander William Riker.
 How long has it been since we've seen each other?
 (lightly) Oh yes, and I seem to remember a certain young lieutenant who had harsh words about snap inspections, and the admirals who pulled them.
 Happy to have you, Admiral.
 Bridge. Congratulations on your appointment. Command of a Starbase.
 I was a little surprised at the decision to put a base in force this close to the Neutral Zone.
 Lieutenant Worf.
 The two of you are acquainted?
 What exactly will this work entail?
 (pausing for a beat to assimilate this) I think we will remove this discussion to the lounge.
 Explain this procedure.
 Data?
 How will you proceed?
 You seem a little vague on the specifics. What are the risks to Commander Data?
 Data is a valued member of my bridge crew. Based on what I've heard I cannot allow him to submit to your experiment.
 No, it's not. This is one of my key officers, and he's been removed without consulting me.
 Come.
 Please, sit down. We've got a problem.
 Your service to this ship has been exemplary. I don't want to lose you.
 There is a solution which presents itself.
 Undergo the procedure, then the transfer order becomes moot.
 Data, I understand your objections to this procedure, but I also have to consider Starfleet's interests. If Commander Maddox is correct there is a possibility that many more beings such as yourself could be constructed.
 But if he's right, Starfleet would be immeasurably enriched.
 It's precisely because you are a Starfleet officer that they can. We take an oath to serve. In this case this is the form your service is taking.
 Yes.
 That will be all, Mister Data. (jabs open the com on his desk) Computer. Pull all relevant Starfleet regulations concerning officer transfers.
 I need your help.
 I've been trying to make heads or tails of this gibberish, and it's finally defeated me. My android officer has been transferred so he can undergo a highly dangerous procedure. I want to stop it.
 Once Maddox has Data under his control anything could happen. I don't trust that man.
 (pacing) Acceptable risks, justified risks, yes, but I can't accept this. It's unfair and unjust. What about his rights...
 (raising a warning finger) Don't start. Is there an option?
 (stiff because he thinks she's taunting him) Yes, I came to you. You're the JAG officer in this sector. I had to come to you.
 Trust is too painful a word.
 Captain's log, supplemental. Commander Bruce Maddox, having been thwarted by Data's abrupt resignation from Starfleet is now seeking a legal remedy for his woes. Captain Louvois has requested my presence at those discussions.
 Data is a valued member of my crew, an outstanding bridge officer, a --
 He's an officer in Starfleet. He has certain rights...
 Starfleet is not an organization that ignores its own regulations when they become inconvenient. Whether you like it or not, Data (separating and punctuating each word) does... have... rights.
 A decision with such broad-ranging implications must be supported by an official ruling. (to Phillipa, icy) And I trust you will apply the same zeal to your research that you used during the Stargazer court-martial.
 Number One, Captain Louvois has called. We're expected in her office. Meet me in Transporter Room Five.
 And if I challenge this ruling?
 Then I so challenge. Convene your hearing.
 Surely there are regulations to cover this eventuality.
 Very well.
 You don't have to remind us of our duty. Just remember yours.
 (cutting straight to the heart of the matter, with no attempt to soften the blow) Captain Louvois has issued a ruling that you are the property of Starfleet Command. You can't resign.
 No, you're not going to submit. We're going to fight this. Captain Louvois may be overly attached to the letter of the law, but she has not forgotten its spirit. She's convening a hearing and we are going to lay the question of your legal status to rest once and for all. (he rises, and paces away, turns back, and adds uncomfortably) I have been asked to represent you, but if there is some other officer with whom you would feel more comfortable --
 Care to try your hand, Number One?
 (exchanging blows with his opponent) This isn't about you and me.
 (exchanging several lightning blows with his opponent) That's the nature of the adversarial process.
 (turning very slowly, leaning on his sword and regarding Riker) Are you suggesting that we are not evenly matched?
 I see. (slash) Then... you are here... (slash) to warn me... (slash) that you are going to do... (slash) Everything within your power and within the boundaries of the law... (slash) to win!
 So am I.
 All right, I'm going to need to know everything about you.
 I want to hear it from you.
 Data, Data, Data, whoa, stop. I could get this from the computer.
 I need to know how you think, what you want, how you feel. What drives you, motivates you.
 We have to prove that you're a sentient life-form.
 That's not what I need to hear.
 We're searching for an argument which will legally deny that obvious fact.
 Data!
 Stop babbling. (rewinding the threads of his fast-tattering patience) The law recognizes many things as people that aren't possessed of flesh and blood. It's a little legal fiction, you see.
 We are, your honor.
 (leaping to his feet) Objection, your honor, I want it read. All of it.
 (again on his feet) Objection, your honor. Many races possess meta-human strength. It's not relevant to the issue before this court.
 Objection! What is the point of all this?
 I request a recess.
 I've lost, and I'm not even sure I mind. Data is a machine. But there is something bothering me. Something I'm missing. Or is it just wounded pride that I've lost and in front of her.
 (waving it aside) Ancient history.
 (Drumming fingers on the table, abruptly he decides to tell her. It emerges in sharp staccato.) The Stargazer court-martial. It should have been a routine hearing. Yes, I had lost my ship, but my actions were entirely justified. (MORE)
 Phillipa was assistant to the prosecution. She dug up every obscure case and citation and the panel hammered at me for three days. It damn near ended my career. It did end us. She's enjoying this situation. She knows I disapprove of the adversarial system. Now she's forced me into active participation, and she's both pleased and angered to see me fail.
 (pushing back his chair) Well, there's only one thing to do. I go to her in the morning, and we discuss a deal.
 I have to salvage at least some of Data's rights. If Data agrees to undergo Commander Maddox's procedure we can get out of this hearing before he's declared the property of Starfleet command.
 The ability to build another. A hundred others, a thousand.
 Explore for us. Enter the dangerous situations.
 (very intent) You said something earlier about decisions today.
 Precedent! This case will set the precedent for all the future Datas. It will determine their status, and they'll all be property.
 (very excited) Not a word we want back in our vocabulary.
 (making his opening statement) Commander Riker has dramatically demonstrated to this court that Lieutenant Commander Data is a machine. Do we deny that? No. But how is this relevant? We too are machines, just machines of a different type. Commander Riker has continually reminded us that Data was built by a human. We do not deny that fact. But again how is it relevant? Does construction imply ownership? Children are created from the building blocks of their parents' DNA. Are they property? We have a chance in this hearing to severely limit the boundaries of freedom. And I think we better be pretty damn careful before we take so arrogant a step. I call Lieutenant Commander Data to the stand.
 (continuing; lifts out the case of medals, and displays the contents) What are these, please?
 Why pack them? What logical purpose do they serve?
 (holding up the book of sonnets) And this?
 You value it?
 Why?
 (lifts out the holocube, and triggers it; Tasha stands before them) And this? You have no portraits of any other of your crewmates. Why this person?
 Mister Data, may I remind you, that you are under oath. (more gently now) And under the circumstances, I don't think Tasha would mind.
 I have no further questions of this witness.
 I call to the stand Commander Bruce Maddox as a hostile witness.
 Enough. Suffice it to say, he's an expert. (right up in his face) Commander Maddox, it is your contention that Data is not a sentient being and therefore not entitled to those rights reserved for all other life-forms in this Federation?
 Why, Commander?
 What is required for sentience?
 Do you know what sentience is, Commander?
 Excellent. Then you can enlighten the rest of us.
 (continuing; right in Maddox's face) Prove to this court that I'm sentient.
 Why? Because you can't do it?
 So I'm sentient, but Data isn't?
 Why?
 Ah, the second ingredient. But let's deal with the first requirement. Is Data intelligent?
 Why?
 Like this hearing. What about self awareness. What does that mean? Why am I self aware?
 Data, what are you doing now?
 And what's at stake?
 My rights. My status. My right to choose. My life. He seems pretty damn self aware to me. Well, Commander Maddox, I'm waiting.
 Do you like Data?
 But you admire him?
 (interrupting) Piece of engineering and programming. Yes, you've said that. You've devoted your life to the study of cybernetics in general?
 And Data in particular?
 And now you're proposing to dismantle him.
 How many more?
 And do what with them?
 How?
 (interrupting; he picks up an object and throws it down a disposal chute) Are expendable.
 Are you expendable, Commander Maddox? Never mind. A single Data is a curiosity, a wonder, but a thousand Datas, doesn't that become a new race? And aren't we going to be judged as a species about how we treat these creations? If they're expendable, disposable, aren't we? What is Data?
 What... is... he?
 Is he? Are you sure?
 But he's met two of your three criteria for sentience, and we haven't addressed the third. So we might find him meeting your third criterion, and then what is he?
 He doesn't know. (to Phillipa) Do you? That's the decision you're facing. Your honor, a courtroom is a crucible. In it we burn away the egos, the selfish desires, the half-truths, until we're left with the pure product -- a truth -- for all time. Sooner or later it's going to happen. This man or others like him are going to succeed in replicating Data. And then we have to decide -- what are they? And how will we treat these creations of our genius? The decision you reach here today stretches far beyond this android and this courtroom. It will reveal the kind of a people we are. And what (points to Data) ... they are going to be. Do you condemn then to slavery? Starfleet was founded to seek out new life. (indicating Data) Well, there he sits, your honor, waiting on our decision. You have a chance to make law. Well, let's make a good one. Let us be wise.
 Take us to impulse power.
 How much time do these adjustments require?
 Magnify.
 Not a very inviting planet. Even for a research outpost.
 Open hailing frequencies, Mister Worf.
 This is Captain Picard of the USS Enterprise.
 (to Worf) Can you clean it up?
 This is Picard -- would you please repeat your message?
 That is correct.
 Human.
 Whether they're friendly or not, Salia has the rank of head of state. We will treat both her and Anya accordingly. Number One, Mister Worf, let's greet our visitors.
 Welcome aboard the Enterprise. I am Captain Jean-Luc Picard.
 It is.
 Of course.
 Very well.
 We are housing you in the quarters normally reserved for Starfleet admiralty. I'm sure you'll find them quite comfortable.
 Status report on our passengers, Lieutenant Worf. Did the accommodations meet with their approval?
 About... ?
 (alert) Are you suggesting they're not who they say they are?
 Captain Picard to Salia's quarters. May I turn on the viewer?
 Are your quarters satisfactory?
 Feel free to contact me if you need anything. Picard out.
 What do we know about the cause of their wars?
 And yet somehow this child is supposed to bring them together.
 Captain Picard to Salia's quarters.
 May I activate the viewer?
 (on viewscreen) I've arranged for Anya to have a tour of the ship. Maybe you'd like to go along.
 (on viewscreen) Your escort will be there shortly. Picard out.
 (to guards) Hold your fire.
 Anya!
 (to Anya) The situation is under control.
 It will have to be.
 Nevertheless, you will obey my orders. You are to remain in your quarters and in your present form for the remainder of this voyage. Is that clear?
 Keep her under guard.
 I've never seen anything like her.
 I want a security team stationed outside Sickbay, Mister Worf.
 Stop her.
 We have obviously brought a very dangerous life-form aboard this ship. I want to minimize the chances of another incident.
 And the most dangerous animal is a mother protecting her young.
 Yes?
 (stern, a hint of tension) Wesley, step away from her.
 Yes, Lieutenant?
 Very good.
 (to Riker) Get us there as quickly as possible, Number One.
 Ensign Crusher, when you have completed your duties in Engineering... report to my Ready Room.
 The woman Anya is not what she appears to be. She is an allasomorph.
 Yes. She is not just the governess, she is also the girl's protector. I don't like to interfere in personal relationships of anyone under my command, but...
 Yes, I do. For the good of the ship and the safety of everyone on board.
 Standard orbit.
 Open hailing frequencies, Mister Worf.
 Explain.
 Magnify. Times twenty.
 The physical resemblance to Klavdia Three is striking.
 Possible, Mister Data.
 Captain's log, supplemental. Since Anya's powers of transformation apparently gave her the ability to escape her guards unnoticed, we have sealed her quarters with a forcefield that will contain her no matter how small a form she may take.
 (continuing) Meanwhile we remain unable to communicate with Daled Four.
 Audio on.
 Splendid.
 Mister Crusher, set speed -- warp six point five.
 Engage.
 Captain's log, stardate 42609.1. In response to a desperate plea for aid by my old friend, Captain Donald Varley of the USS Yamato, I am running a grave risk and taking the Enterprise into the Neutral Zone.
 schematics of the Galaxy Class starships, as:
 (continuing) This rendezvous is necessitated by dangerous malfunctions which are plaguing our sister ship. Perhaps with both crews working together we will be able to eliminate the problem -- before we are detected by the Romulans.
 Mister Crusher -- how long to rendezvous?
 Status of download, Mister Data?
 Trouble, Number One?
 Donald, what's a nice Starfleet Captain like you doing in a place like this?
 Are you suggesting it's a design flaw?
 Donald, we'll get our teams to work. I'm sure neither of us feels too comfortable sitting around the Neutral Zone.
 In the Neutral Zone.
 Don, this was quite a risk to run just to satisfy an archaeological curiosity.
 Don, your transmission is breaking up. (rising, then to Data) Clean that up.
 Yamato, this is the Enterprise, come in Yamato.
 Captain. Don!
 (continuing) Shields up!
 Captain's log, supplemental. The Yamato's entire crew and their families, more than a thousand people, have been lost.
 (continuing) Circumstances, unfortunately, permit us no pause for grief.
 (to Data) Did they attack the Yamato?
 (upward glance; then, sternly) Romulan vessel, this is Captain Picard of the USS Enterprise. Explain your illegal presence in the Neutral Zone --
 Are you responsible for the destruction of the Yamato?
 (looking to his bridge crew) Comments?
 (to Worf) Open com. We will comply when we have determined the cause of the Yamato's destruction. And when we are fully satisfied that you were not responsible. Picard out.
 Forget the Romulans. I want to know what happened to the Yamato. Number One, assemble the staff for a conference in one hour. And I want answers.
 That's not possible.
 Explain.
 Then there is no evidence that a weapon was used?
 Mister Data.
 Theorize. What do you think caused this catastrophic malfunction?
 Knowing where the flaw is located, do you think you can isolate and solve the problem?
 Pull any and all personnel who might be useful to your task.
 If this is a design flaw, we better stay where we are and give Geordi time to work. Or what happened to the Yamato could happen to us.
 Computer, access Captain Donald Varley's personal log. Search parameter, locate entries containing the words Romulan and Iconia.
 Mister Data, there is a reference in Captain Varley's personal log to a probe which scanned the Yamato.
 Put it on Main Viewer.
 (to Data) Have you ever seen anything like that before?
 Engineering.
 Progress on your matter_antimatter scan?
 Data, when the Yamato was probed, where was she?
 Estimated time of arrival at warp factor eight?
 It can't be helped. Ensign Crusher, lay in a course. Warp factor eight.
 (continuing) We are going to assume the Yamato's mission.
 If that's what it takes to get some answers.
 Come.
 Yes.
 China was thought to be only a myth until Marco Polo travelled there. No, the Iconians were real. We know that three systems in this sector have a number of cultural similarities. Similarities which can be explained only if there had been a single unifying force.
 Probably conquered.
 Perhaps. Ancient texts refer to them as the Demons of Air and Darkness, but that could have so many different interpretations.
 Legend has it that they travelled without the benefit of spaceships. Merely appearing from thin air on distant planets.
 Wouldn't we seem magical to a stone-age people?
 Archaeology has been a hobby since my Academy days. But why don't we talk about what really brought you here?
 Easily. No, not easily.
 (continuing) Darjeeling tea, hot. We handle it because we are trained to, as you will be. But if the time ever comes when the death of even a single individual fails to move us --
 (continuing) That should not have happened.
 Captain's log, supplemental. As happened with her sister, the Enterprise is being plagued by a series of system failures.
 (continuing) So far they are random, but perhaps early symptoms of what happened to the Yamato.
 Lieutenant, are you making any progress toward a solution to our problems?
 How?
 If it was the probe, that explains the Yamato; but how do you account for the difficulties the Enterprise is experiencing?
 Are our problems likely to attain the seriousness experienced by the Yamato?
 Lieutenant, time is the one thing which we do not have in abundance.
 (impatiently) Mister Data.
 How long ago?
 Magnify.
 Donald Varley died believing that it was.
 Shields up. Ready the tractor beam. Lieutenant La Forge, I'm about to assist you in your research. A probe has been launched from Iconia. I intend to capture it.
 Prepare to lower shields, Mister Crusher.
 Worf, target phasers!
 Fire!
 (continuing; cool as ice) Mister La Forge, are you all right?
 What can you do?
 (to Geordi) So the earlier probe was responsible for the Yamato's destruction.
 So why haven't we suffered their fate?
 We may never reach that point. A variation of what happened to the Yamato may destroy us first.
 The probe was launched from Iconia, probably by an automated system. There may be records near the launch site which could help us find a solution.
 I will lead it.
 Yes.
 Will, ever since I was a cadet I've studied the Iconians. I have to be the one to go.
 (continuing) The Enterprise is yours.
 We're aware of the risks. Energize.
 Keep trying them. Communication is going to be erratic.
 Nor do I, Mister Worf.
 I would not expect any. Judging from the severity of bombardment, I doubt any Iconians survived.
 (continuing) Well, Mister Data, let us see if we can make sense of this.
 This is very reminiscent of Dinasian.
 Is it possible that they are all branches of a language family beginning with Iconian?
 Run a comparison between simple, basic words in Dinasian, Dewan and Iccobar. Let's see if we can't reconstruct a common root language.
 Data, Data, Data -- the point.
 Yes, let's get on with it.
 (to himself) Demons of Air and Darkness, indeed.
 A gateway.
 Data, that was very foolish.
 No, Data. You might not be able to get back, and I can't risk losing you.
 Is this how the Iconians travelled? Stepping across light years as easily as we would cross a room? Those worlds might be in distant sectors of our galaxy.
 (continuing; almost to himself) This is what Varley feared. What he lost his life for.
 The Romulans could turn this technology into a weapon.
 We can't make that assumption. The probe's effect on the Yamato was devastating, but I suspect that was by accident rather than design.
 Do we? The little we know was passed down by the descendants of the people who attacked this world. I'm beginning to think the Iconians may have been the victims of some very bad press.
 There's an unfortunate tendency in most cultures to fear what they don't understand. It is possible that their enemies, when confronted with this technology, were driven to attack the Iconians out of fear.
 I believe that it was. Gentlemen, we have a way home. (a beat) I think the Iconians might have outfoxed their enemies. Perhaps they didn't all die in the bombardment; some may have passed through this.
 Time the rotation.
 Data, respond.
 How bad is it?
 How long until the Enterprise reappears?
 Stand ready, Mister Worf, and go through with Data. Geordi can learn from him. Maybe help him.
 This will be the test.
 (holding out a hand) Data, give me your tricorder.
 I'm right in front of you... Data, what is it?
 You're blind.
 (handing the tricorder to Worf) Destroy this.
 And that is precisely why it must be destroyed. Time?
 (to himself) I am running out of time. We all are.
 (continuing) This room and the technology contained in it must be destroyed. It cannot be allowed to fall into Romulan hands.
 How! How do I do it? How can I destroy everything? Control room, the probes? All of it.
 I detonate it?
 (giving Data a shake) How? What do I do?
 Probes... the probes. Launch? Do I launch the probes?
 (continuing; to Worf) What's that going to do? Nothing.
 Doors?
 The doors will open automatically when the launch begins. I'd have to override.
 The power source! The backwash from the rockets will spill into the main power grids and cause an overload.
 Which control keys? Damn, I forgot you can't see.
 We're directly opposite the gateway. There is a rectangular screen.
 Triangular screen. The lights directly above are solid amber. To the left red --
 That's the launch sequence?
 (continuing) How do I override the doors?
 I hope you're not stuttering. (to Worf) I don't know how long a delay there will be between the launch and the detonation. I'll hold off keying the launch sequence until you're through the gate. How long until the Enterprise returns?
 I'll go through the gate.
 Any place is going to be better than this room. Worf, I'm depending on you. Get Data back to the Enterprise. He may be their last hope.
 Did what?
 (feeling the effects of the transporter kicking in) Not I think, today, Commander.
 Bridge.
 Get us out of here. The Romulan ship is set for auto-destruct and they can't deactivate it.
 I see Data's back to normal.
 It seems that everything is back to normal. Well done, Commander.
 It has a number of equations and theorems on it -- like a present-day blackboard. The door CHIMES.
 Come.
 (continuing) Fermat's last theorem. Familiar with it?
 It's intriguing. When Fermat died they found scrawled in the margin of his notes that he had found a "remarkable proof." (beat) Unfortunately he never lived to write it down. And for the last eight hundred years people have been trying to rediscover it.
 I find the process relaxing.
 Can you identify?
 Make it so, Number One.
 Energize.
 What sort of markings?
 There's something here.
 (continuing; frowning) That symbol... Do you recognize it?
 But that's not possible. No ship of that time period could have come this far.
 The question is, how did it get here?
 Are you certain it's artificially constructed?
 Yet it does seem to be down there. Is there a connection between the structure and the ship?
 (continuing) Suggestions?
 Form an away team, minimal complement.
 Let's see if we can find the architects.
 Describe the structure.
 What is it, Commander?
 Where's that interference originating?
 Lock onto the landing party. Have the Transporter Room prepare to beam them up.
 Can they hear us?
 Make it so.
 Status report?
 Is there an intelligence causing the interference?
 Captain's log, supplemental. We remain in orbit around Theta Eight, still out of contact with the away team.
 (heavy static) ... Riker, can you read me?
 (into com) Why haven't you left the building, Number One?
 Something at your location is interfering with our exchange... Working on the problem...
 (sharply) Then find another.
 (to himself) What is going on down there?
 Picard to Riker.
 What's your situation?
 We can't transport.
 Get on it.
 Colonel Stephen Richey was the commanding officer of the explorer ship Charybdis which had a terrestrial launch date of 7-23-2067. It was the first manned attempt to travel beyond the confines of the Euclidian solar system. Its telemetry system failed and it was never heard from again... (then, intrigued) Why is this of interest, Number One?
 Suppose we phaser a slice in the field which surrounds the structure?
 How long would they live under those conditions?
 But you could revive them.
 I understand the risk, but I will not warp off and leave them. (to Geordi) Make your preparations.
 (sighs with frustration) Number One... If we don't take some action, make some attempt -- however dangerous it may be -- to rescue you, you may very well be lost to the confines of that conundrum for all eternity. That is certain death for you all... and that... (building angrily now) ... that is unacceptable! We have set phaser focus with energy ratios sufficient to penetrate the structure --
 Commander Riker...
 Would you join me on the bridge?
 We have picked up an automated signal from a Federation shuttlecraft.
 Apparently not.
 I don't know.
 Perhaps someone to answer your questions, Number One. Open hailing frequencies.
 Captain's log, stardate 42679.2. While traversing an unexplored section of the galaxy en route to the Endicor system, a Federation shuttlecraft has quite suddenly appeared -- virtually out of nowhere. There are no other ships in the vicinity -- and no indications whence it came nor how it got out here.
 On screen.
 Number One.
 Doctor Pulaski, you are needed in Shuttle Bay Two.
 What is it, Number One?
 (irritated) Where else would I be?
 Why? What is it?
 What's his condition?
 Has he been injured?
 Then why is he unconscious? What happened to him?
 Strange? In what way? Non-human? Artificial?
 Can you revive him?
 Counselor.
 Data, we have to know what is on the shuttle's logs.
 Number One, I'll be in Sickbay. Keep me informed.
 It looks like the kind of damage caused by an antimatter explosion.
 (urgent) Data, I need those logs. (to Troi) Counselor.
 This smells like a set-up.
 (nods, yes) If it is me, me from where? And why in a shuttle? There is nothing about this which is random or happenstance. Look beneath the boards, Counselor; I expect something foul and familiar to crawl out.
 Have you been able to determine why he is still unconscious?
 Wake him.
 (continuing) What happened?
 Go ahead.
 Captain's log, supplemental. Part of the mystery has been solved. The reason there are two NCC one-seven-zero-one-D-five shuttlecrafts is because one of them is from the future... six hours to be exact. And, so presumably is the facsimile of me.
 Try to wake him, again.
 No!
 I know what it is... don't sedate him. Let him be! (then, changing his tone) Please... allow him to remain conscious.
 I'm fine, Doctor... Save your ministrations for the patient. I want a staff meeting in five minutes. Doctor, I assume you will want to remain here.
 Keep me informed, Doctor -- of any change no matter how small.
 Proceed.
 Proceed.
 Captain's personal log, supplemental. (there is a long pause) For the record... I have just witnessed the total destruction of the USS Enterprise with a loss of all hands, save one. Me.
 Yes, but let's proceed on the premise that what we have just seen is factual and that somehow, in less than four hours, the Enterprise will be destroyed and somehow -- although this is unfathomable -- I, and I alone escaped. Discussion.
 Data?
 Yes, this isn't a rock in the road which once seen can be avoided. It's much more complex.
 Agreed. So let's continue on course. Everyone return to your duty stations. Somewhere out there something will happen... a decision will be made which will cause me to become separated from the Enterprise -- at the time that decision will seem correct, but it won't be. We have to anticipate and not make the same mistake once. Something is waiting for us out there -- let's determine what it is as quickly as possible.
 Doctor?
 You're saying, when our time intersects with the time he left, at that instant he will be functioning normally. And there will be two of us.
 I don't believe that is possible.
 What did you feel?
 Captain's log, supplemental. We continue on course to Endicor. We are now less than two hours away from our rendezvous with ourselves.
 Yes, Doctor.
 I'll be right there.
 (continuing) Number One, you have the bridge.
 How is he?
 He is now aware of me.
 (sotto, almost to himself) But, does he know where he is, and who's here with him?
 (then to P2) What went wrong?
 (continuing) You know... don't you?
 (continuing) What did you do? What happened? Why did you leave the ship?
 (continuing) Don't turn away. Look at me.
 (continuing) Picard!
 (continuing) LOOK AT ME!
 He knows I'm here.
 What is he afraid of?
 (continuing; back to P2) Damn you -- help me! Why did you leave the ship?
 (to Troi) Are you still convinced he is me?
 Not in the slightest. Except for his features there is nothing about him which I find familiar.
 (continuing) I want you to stay with him. He will be able to communicate with you before any of the rest of us.
 What force or phenomenon could cause a shuttle to be thrown back in time?
 Using the gravitational pull of a star to "slingshot" back in time. Is that what happened here?
 No. Some external force was needed.
 Are you suggesting there is a conscious mind at work here?
 The Traveler moved through time with the power of his mind.
 (frustrated) No -- and Manheim's experiments with gravity and time were rudimentary, and uncontrollable.
 Explain.
 Go on.
 Are you telling me to just sit down -- shut up and wait.
 I don't do that well.
 (thoughtfully) Yes -- perhaps it is.
 Report.
 Captain's log, supplemental. The waiting is over. We have apparently intersected with... something.
 Transfer engine control to the bridge.
 What do you make of it, Number One?
 What is it trying to learn?
 (to Riker) We should stay and investigate.
 But, was that the mistake?
 (continuing) ... staying too long.
 We should go now.
 It's the prudent move.
 (continuing) I never thought I would hear myself say something like that.
 But you'd rather stay and find out what it is? What is its intent?
 Lieutenant La Forge.
 See if you can get us out of here, Mister La Forge. Maximum warp.
 Engage.
 Put it to the wall.
 All stop.
 Status.
 Everything we do tightens its grip. Let's see what we can learn. Launch a Class One probe.
 That was personal.
 How long can you maintain it?
 Is he still alive?
 Hold.
 Counselor, what if I were to leave the Enterprise? Would its attention stay focused on me?
 But, maybe in those few seconds -- the Enterprise could break free. In any case, that's what he... the other Picard... must have thought.
 Prepare a shuttle, Number One.
 I have to make a stop in Sickbay. We may be on a road which has no turns.
 I know.
 Do you know where you are?
 But you're only vaguely aware of it. And me -- do you know who I am?
 (continuing) No. You don't.
 Release him.
 No -- release him!
 No. Security, this is the captain -- disregard that order. And clear all personnel -- repeat, all personnel -- from Shuttle Bay Two. I don't want any distractions. You... (meaning both Troi and Pulaski) ... stay here.
 You have made the decision to leave the ship?
 Why?
 You're certain.
 What's your other option?
 You are wrong. Leaving won't save your ship. Don't you remember? It was destroyed -- you saw it happen.
 If that's true, then help me. We want the same thing. We want the Enterprise to be safe. There has to be a piece of information which I don't have. What is it?
 You?
 Yes.
 (in sync, they respond to Riker) Understood.
 (continuing) When you say it's "you," do you mean it's still you? And it's not me -- just you. Has this entity singled you out -- somehow making a connection?
 Wait. You can -- I'll let you, hell, man, I'll go with you, but first tell me. What is -- what was, your other choice?
 You don't know what I'm talking about. You're frozen with a single thought -- unable to change -- unable to alter any part of your previous actions.
 There must be.
 What is it? What would never work?
 Destroy the Enterprise -- how?
 Tell me -- what was your other choice? We can't escape it -- we can't fight it, we can't go forward.
 (realizing) Was that it... Was that the other choice?
 No.
 (continuing) I can't allow it. Before we have any chance of moving forward, the cycle must end.
 (touching his communicator) Doctor Pulaski -- report to Shuttle Bay Two.
 Bridge.
 Number One, we have been wasting our energy trying to escape. It only weakens us. (he moves to his Command Chair) Helm, set a course for the center of the vortex. Lieutenant La Forge, on my command -- I want all the power you can muster.
 Yes.
 Everyone hold your position -- no matter what. ENGAGE!
 What's our position?
 Explain.
 You have the bridge, Number One.
 Lots of questions, Number One...
 (continuing) ... and damn few answers.
 He certainly did not act like me, at least not the way I think I act.
 Or maybe "he" was thrown back in time so that we would be able to take another road... make another choice?
 It's said... if you travel far enough you will eventually meet yourself.
 (continuing) I will tell you this... it's a very unnerving experience, one I hope never to repeat.
 Captain's log, Stardate 42686.4. We are en route to Starbase Montgomery for engineering consultations prompted by minor readout anomalies...
 
 Agreed. We'll have Starbase Montgomery give us an independent reading.
 That's certainly an option, but since we're stopping at Starbase Montgomery anyway, we'll let them do the analysis.
 I think we could all use a twelve-hour layover. Besides, I've just received some personnel transfer directives. Priority matters --
 Reduce to impulse power -- (then, to Riker) Meet me in the Observation Lounge when you're done here.
 Number One, I find myself recollecting the arrival of a new first officer to the Enterprise and a manual docking very confidently achieved. I suspect that I was somewhat miserly in offering congratulations then, so let me make up for it now. Congratulations. The captain of the Starship Ares is retiring. You've been selected as his replacement.
 And she's picked up indications of an intelligent life-form... but nothing conclusive.
 That's why they're asking you, Number One. Not for your military proficiency, but for your skill as an explorer and diplomat.
 With no guarantee of finding anything once you arrive. Well, you have twelve hours to think it over. And maybe it's premature, but congratulations, "Captain."
 Establish synchronous orbit.
 Starbase Montgomery is sending a civilian advisor aboard to brief you on the Ares's mission.
 Yes. Strategic attache with specialized knowledge of the frontier regions. I think you'll find the briefing... very interesting.
 Enjoy...
 I've seen your mission briefing.
 Any questions?
 His name is Flaherty, as I recall.
 Correct. The last time I saw him, Commander Flaherty spoke over forty languages. Klingon, Romulan, Giamon, and Stroyerian were among the more colorful, as I recall...
 He has the unique ability of instantaneously interpreting, collating, and extrapolating any verbal communication he hears. (then) You should find him helpful in Sector Vega-Omicron.
 My only regret is that your reunion will mark Will's farewell.
 I have no doubt --
 Of course... excuse me, gentlemen...
 Come.
 (continuing) Everything in order, Number One?
 I don't know, and if you're asking me what I think you should do, I don't know that either. But I can spell out, albeit crudely, what you are choosing between. (a beat) Your present position as first officer of the Enterprise brings you prestige, distinction, even glamour of a kind. You are the second in command of Starfleet's flagship -- but still, second in command. Your promotion will transfer you to a relatively insignificant ship in an obscure corner of the galaxy, but it will be your ship. Being who you are, that ship will vibrate with your authority, your style, your vision. There is no substitute for being in the center of the stage -- any stage.
 Granted.
 Captain's log, Stardate 42686.9. (TO BE DETERMINED)
 (to Geordi) What were the analytical team's findings?
 Precisely what Data recommended, as I recall. But it did give Commander Riker the time he needed to consider his promotion. Now that he's accepted it, we can leave him at Starbase Montgomery.
 Number One?
 ... granted.
 (there is a pause) Any particular reason for this change of heart?
 (then to Conn) Engage.
 Captain's log, Stardate 42680.3. We are the first manned vessel to enter the Selcundi Drema quadrant. Previous unmanned probes have recorded unusual levels of geological activity in all five planetary systems. I am hoping the Enterprise will find the answer to this engima.
 the Holodeck doors. He is dressed for riding in breeches, high boots, sweater. Hunt cap beneath his arm, gloves, whip.
 You're sure you won't reconsider?
 An optimistic vote of confidence from the non-rider.
 Small animals, no, but horses --
 (continuing) Computer, program Holodeck for a woodland setting with a bridle path and an appropriate mount.
 (impatiently) A horse, an Earth horse.
 Arabian. (to Troi) The Arabs believed that Allah gathered the south wind and made the horse.
 I like that. Oh yes, computer, English tack, and I will control the animal myself.
 Hello, my beauty.
 It goes deeper than that. A fine war mare would sleep in a bedouin's tent, carry him into battle, feed his children with her milk. There is a bond which forms from mutual need.
 If you want leave, you need only ask.
 (indicating the horse) You're sure you won't try? It's a good way to relax. We can get you something quiet and gentle.
 Strange. I should have thought that Betazoids would be outstanding animal trainers.
 I should think the shifting passions of... (he taps his chest) ... this beast would be far more terrifying.
 Yes, Number One?
 Something interesting?
 On my way. (he pats the horse's neck) Later, old girl.
 Quite impressive.
 This is Commander Riker's meeting.
 All of this is true, but there is an old horse trainer's adage about putting too much weight on a young back -- we don't want him to break under the pressure.
 Tempering is done in extremes.
 Who will someday be a man and need a fine edge that will hold, that won't dull at the first touch of resistance.
 Ensign, this is a serious responsibility.
 These officers are here to assist you. Not judge, but help. I suggest you use them; they are a valuable resource. And by the way, I have more respect for an officer who knows when to admit ignorance and ask a question than one who, out of pride, will blunder blindly forward.
 Captain's log, Stardate 42680.7. We are entering the second Selcundi star system. I believe the volatility of these planets originated in the primordial gas cloud which formed them five billion years ago.
 It has been six weeks since our entrance into the Selcundi Drema quadrant. Each system has revealed the same disturbing geological upheavals on every planet.
 Feels good, doesn't it? You're a lovely darling.
 Quite all right. It must be important, or you wouldn't be here.
 There is a loneliness inherent in that whisper in the darkness.
 (gently) But it didn't stop there.
 To what degree is this involvement?
 Dear heaven, you've got a pen pal. Does this society have any idea that there is interstellar life?
 Merde. Just where does she think you're calling from?
 Go on.
 Then your pen pal is in trouble.
 What are you proposing?
 And violate the Prime Directive.
 (almost to himself) We don't even know if this catastrophe is preventable. (a beat) Call a conference in my quarters. All senior staff.
 And Data, all communication with this life-form must stop.
 You see the dilemma?
 Doctor, I'm sure the lieutenant did not intend it in that way. In this situation we must use caution. Our actions could have a profound effect upon the future. If we could see all possible outcomes --
 So Doctor, you draw the line at the death of millions.
 Same situation if it's an epidemic rather than a geological catastrophe?
 How about a war? A generations-long conflict that is killing millions. Do we interfere?
 (continuing) Now we're less secure in our moral certitude. And what if it's not death. What if it's an oppressive government which is enslaving millions?
 (continuing) The Prime Directive serves many purposes. Not the least of which is to protect us. It keeps us from allowing our emotions to overrule our judgement.
 That's sophistry and you know it.
 (to Data) I want you to sever the remaining com link with Drema Four.
 Wait.
 (continuing; very weary) Oh, Data.
 (continuing) That whisper in the dark has become a plea. We cannot turn our backs.
 Excellent.
 In plain English this means that the dilithium is causing the geological catastrophe?
 All right, we know the why. Now what can we do?
 Can we reverse the process?
 No theories or half answers. Yes or no.
 We just keep getting in deeper and deeper, don't we?
 Unless.
 You may tell Commander Data that he has my permission to contact his friend and guide her to a safer location.
 (continuing) Do you know where we are now, Number One?
 Up to our necks.
 How do these resonators destroy the crystals?
 Tea, Earl Grey, hot.
 What?
 I know you're worried, but transporting to the surface is only going to make a bad situation worse.
 Yes.
 In for a penny, in for a pound, is that what you're saying, Mister Data?
 (continuing) Oh hell.
 (continuing) Go.
 Go. Handle the transport, Number One.
 Commander Riker to the bridge.
 (to Riker) Where is he?
 He has brought that child aboard my ship and onto my bridge.
 Mister Data, would you kindly assume your station.
 (continuing) Counselor, escort her to Sickbay.
 Take your station, Mister Data, and keep her with you. This does directly concern her.
 (to Wesley) When should the results become evident?
 Data, take Sarjenka to Sickbay.
 Yes.
 Data and the alien are on their way down. What would be involved in removing all memory of her communication with Data and her visit to this ship?
 Well, do your best.
 Come.
 No thanks are necessary. You reminded us that there are obligations beyond duty.
 One of my officers...
 (continuing) ... One of my friends was in trouble. I had to help him.
 That too is part of friendship, remembrance and regrets.
 And understanding that has taken you a step closer to humanity.
 Yes, I'm aware of how often you order picnics to be held in here.
 Yes, Ensign. It's all over me.
 Ensign... ah...
 Ensign... (restraining her) I think it would be simpler if you let me change my uniform?
 Yes, Chief Engineer. I believe I do understand now.
 I'm sure you will. Carry on.
 Deck nine. Officers' quarters.
 Crewman? What's going on?
 Q.
 We agreed you would never trouble my ship again!
 Enterprise -- this is Picard.
 Stop this foolishness, Q. Return me to the Enterprise.
 Keeping me a prisoner out here will not force me to discuss anything with you.
 Then the Enterprise will continue on with Riker as captain. Return me to my ship.
 You know him.
 You're speaking of yourself, Q -- not Guinan.
 Guinan's not the issue here -- you are... We had an agreement that you would stop meddling with us.
 What do you want, Q? State your business and let's get on with it.
 Join us as what? To do what? Would you start as an ordinary crewman -- what task is too menial for an entity?
 Not at all. That is the last thing I would do. You, by definition are part of our charter. Our mission is to go forth -- to seek out new and different life forms, and you certainly qualify as one of the most unique life forms I have ever encountered. To learn more about you is frankly quite provocative, but you are next of kin to chaos.
 ... and now you say you want to join us.
 No.
 Simply stated -- we don't trust you.
 I don't know that we are prepared, but I do know that we are ready to confront it.
 Absolutely. That's why we are out here.
 By whose calculation?
 We're not smug -- nor arrogant. We are resolute and we are willing. But more than that we are determined. Your help is not required.
 Bridge this is the captain -- all stop.
 Status.
 Guinan, have your people been in this part of the galaxy?
 Captain's log, supplemental. The entity Q has flung the Enterprise to a distant part of the galaxy, which we are going to take the opportunity to explore.
 On screen.
 Magnify.
 Data, what can you tell us?
 Hailing frequencies.
 This is Captain Jean-Luc Picard of the USS Enterprise.
 Guinan.
 Activate your viewscreen -- I want you to monitor what's going on up here. I may need your input.
 You are acquainted with this life form?
 What do you want?
 We mean you no harm. Do you understand me?
 Stop -- we cannot allow you to interfere with the operation of this ship.
 Lieutenant Worf.
 Worf -- use whatever means to neutralize the intruder.
 Because her people had contact with the Borg, I have requested that Guinan participate in this conference. You are aware of what just occurred in Main Engineering.
 Tell, us exactly what happened between your people and the Borg.
 How do we reason with them? Let them know that we are not a threat?
 On screen.
 This is Captain Jean-Luc Picard of the...
 Counselor.
 That would have some definite advantages.
 We're on our way.
 On any heading -- warp eight engage.
 Locate the exact source of the tractor beam -- lock on phasers.
 Fire.
 With whatever force you need terminate that beam.
 Fire!
 Casualties?
 What is the condition of their ship?
 Conference.
 Guinan -- what else can you tell us about these creatures?
 Anything would be helpful.
 Number One.
 (continuing) Eighteen of our people have died. Please tell us that this is one of your illusions.
 Very good.
 Cancel -- time for that later.
 Visit their ship?
 (considers it; nods) Agreed. Assemble a minimal away team and take a look at what's over there.
 Captain's log, supplemental. We have been attacked without provocation by an alien race which Guinan calls the Borg. Hopefully, we have neutralized their vessel. Commander Riker is leading an away team in an attempt to learn more about them.
 Go ahead, Number One.
 Explain.
 Transporter room, this is the Captain.
 If your lock on the away team wavers in the slightest -- beam them back.
 Describe it.
 Transporter Chief, beam the away team directly to the bridge.
 Now, Mister Crusher -- engage.
 On screen.
 Magnify.
 Let's see if we can outrun it. (to com) Lietenant La Forge, I want maximum warp for as long as you can hold it.
 Agreed.
 Fire.
 Captain's log supplemental. We are unable to maintain the gap between the Enterprise and the Borg ship.
 Go ahead.
 I understand, Lieutenant La Forge.
 Fire the photons.
 Q. End this.
 If we all die, here and now -- you will never be able to gloat. You wanted to frighten us -- we're frightened. You wanted to show that we are inadequate -- for the moment I will grant that. You want me to say that I need you. Right now -- I need you.
 I understand what you have done here Q, but the lesson could have been learned without the loss of eighteen members of my crew.
 Set a course for the closest starbase.
 They will be coming.
 Q might have done the right thing for the wrong reason.
 Perhaps we needed a good kick in our complacency to get us ready for what's ahead.
 Captain's log, Stardate 42723.8. The Enterprise is en route to the Epsilon Nine Sector for astronomical survey of a new pulsar cluster. In the meantime, Ensign Crusher will be diverting to Starbase five one five for progressive Starfleet exams...
 I won't have you telling me what course to set!
 Oh, please. I feel fine.
 This ship has a mission to carry out.
 I've been looking forward to seeing the Epsilon Pulsar Cluster for myself.
 Absolutely not.
 That's not the point. Not only am I in splendid health, but it would be inappropriate for you to perform the procedure.
 Clarify.
 I never said that.
 I understand you're heading for Starbase five one five.
 Good. I have some business of my own there. I shall accompany. you.
 Prepare the shuttle for immediate departure.
 I'm afraid not, Number One.
 I'm very well aware of that. You have the bridge. Carry on.
 What is it, Number One?
 Not to worry. Ensign Crusher and I will rendezvous with you on your return from the Epsilon Pulsar Cluster.
 Consider it captain's privilege.
 This has nothing to do with ship's business. (then, with a sigh) Suffice it to say that this is strictly a matter of ...vanity.
 Hardly.
 Shuttle Number Two ready for departure.
 E.t.a. thirteen-thirty hours.
 More like a late twenty-second century interplanetary journey.
 You should read more history, Ensign.
 (mumbling to himself) Complete waste of time...
 I shouldn't be taking this trip at all. I belong back on the Enterprise.
 (snappish) It's certainly not my idea!
 (continuing) I'm sorry. I don't mean to take it out on you. (then) I just hate going through another damned cardiac replacement.
 Now you do.
 What else would it be? (then, a bit softer) My own heart was injured and a replacement was necessary. That would have been it except that the replacement is flawed and must now be put right.
 Just pilot the shuttle, Ensign.
 Van Doren's technique has been perfected to two point four percent.
 The cardiac replacement procedure. It has a very low mortality rate. Two point four percent.
 The fact is, I'm not interested in having my innards become the subject of Starfleet gossip.
 Let's just say I have personal reasons and leave it at that, shall we?
 What?
 Ensign...Wesley. That's not true. I have great regard for you, for example. You're a fine young man.
 I do not say what I do not mean.
 Is it? How so?
 I simply have... other priorities.
 Thank you.
 Wishing for a thing does not make it so.
 My career always came first. I never had time.
 There have been certain costs involved.
 A man needs to be careful about that sort of thing.
 Really? I've always had to work at it.
 No. (re his chest) That's why I'm going in to get this thing replaced.
 Well... I was a young Starfleet officer. Just a few years older than you are now. Green as hell. Top of my Academy Class, and oh, so proud. Too proud, as it turned out.
 Several of us were on leave at Far Space Starbase Earhart... something of a galactic outpost in those days--
 That's right. My mates and I were at the Bonestell Recreation Facility, which was nothing more than a crossroads at the time. A trio of Nausicaans came in. They were spoiling for a confrontation with some fresh-faced young Starfleet officers like ourselves. Everyone in our group had the good sense to back away and give these Nausicaans wide berth. Everyone but me, that is. I stood toe-to-toe with the nastiest of the three and let him know what I thought of him, his partners, and his planet. I probably even made some passing reference to his questionable parentage. (MORE)
 The next thing I knew, I had all three of them on me and I was fighting for my life. Acquitted myself quite well for several furious exchanges, I'm proud to say.
 I had this one Nausicaan down on the floor in a particularly devious joint-lock when before I knew what was happening, one of his cohorts drew his weapon and impaled me through the back. Strange sensation, actually. Not much pain. Shock, certainly, at the sight of serrated metal coming out of one's chest, and then a certain giddy warmth. As I recall, I actually laughed aloud. It pierced my heart, of course, and if we hadn't been so near a medical facility I would surely have died.
 Then nothing. I was no hero. I was an undisciplined, opinionated, loud-mouthed young man who was far out of his league. It was a great and painful lesson, but I learned it well. I only hope you won't need to learn it as I did...
 Did you read that book I gave you?
 That's reassuring.
 (re the book in his hand) There is no greater challenge than the study of philosophy.
 The important things never will be. Anyone can be trained to deal with technology, and the mechanics of piloting a starship.
 It takes more than just that. Open your mind to the past... to history, art, philosophy. And then... (re: the stars) ... this will mean something.
 (continuing) Just consider James' wisdom: "Philosophy... is not a technical matter... it is our sense of what life honestly means... our individual way of feeling the total push and pressure of the cosmos." (then) That's what I want for you.
 You don't want to be late for your exams, Ensign.
 Why do I get the feeling you're acting like some kind of escort?
 That woman. She would.
 What is it?
 So did I.
 Get on with it, Doctor. I've got work to do.
 What in the hell are you doing here?
 Oh come on. This is a routine procedure. Quite commonplace.
 I didn't want you involved in this.
 If you're here... the entire crew must know...
 Thank you.
 I beg your pardon.
 I'm pleased to report that Ensign Crusher's Starfleet exam results will enable him to continue with his studies on board the Enterprise. Furthermore, any rumors of my brush with death are greatly exaggerated. Is that clear?
 Good. Set the course for Epsilon Sector. (to Wesley) Warp five, Ensign.
 (continuing) Engage.
 Captain's log, Stardate 42823.2. My meeting with Admiral James Moore has offered me an interesting proposal. We have completed our repairs, and are preparing to warp out.
 of an SOS code. RIKER enters.
 Recognize that?
 It's an old style Terran distress beacon. It kicked in last month, and was detected by the starbase.
 The Ficus quadrant.
 Admiral Moore has offered us the task of investigating the signal.
 Am I so transparent?
 (a little uncomfortable) Oh?
 A lost Earth colony. That is an exciting idea.
 They're calling for help, aren't they?
 Always.
 A loose alliance that formed in the early twenty-second century. It was the first step toward a world government. You should read more history, Number One. Computer, bracket exact dates when this beacon was in general use.
 Locate all Earth deep space launches from 2123 until 2190, and list their destinations.
 Nothing for the Ficus quadrant. Damn it, who's out there?
 Ah, Doctor, how is Worf?
 Come.
 How can something so simple become so complicated?
 (to himself and cutting off Data) There's more than one way to skin a bureaucratic cat.
 There's no record of a launch to the Ficus quadrant. Not unusual if you consider the chaos of the early twenty-second century, but someone had to load that ship.
 There it is. The Mariposa, launch date November 27, 2123. Captain Walter Granger, commanding.
 Thank you, Data.
 It doesn't appear to be. Ah... and here is the cargo list. (in an aside to Data) You can tell a lot about people from their luggage. Let's see, two hundred and twenty five Yoshimitsu computers, five monitor beacon satellites, seven hundred cellular commlinks, fifty spinning wheels --
 Cattle, chickens, pigs. . . . not DNA, the actual livestock. (to Data) Incredible. Why would anyone carry such an insane mix of cargo?
 (exasperated) Data!
 Thank you, Data. But if this was a ship full of utopians, why carry the technological baggage?
 I hate a mystery.
 (interrupting) Allow me to correct myself. I hate a mystery I cannot solve.
 But the comlinks?
 Mister Worf, prepare for immediate evacuation.
 You'll have to go down there, Number One.
 Captain's log, supplemental. Commander Riker has reached the caverns, but we are still waiting to begin the evacuation.
 What's the situation, Number One?
 Their condition?
 Are they willing to leave?
 (interrupting) Well, get them up here.
 I'm not interested, Commander. Initiate the transport.
 No arguments.
 What the devil is going on here?!
 My security chief, Lieutenant Worf.
 I don't want your service, Mister Odell. I want this damn livestock off my ship.
 Alright. Chief O'Brien, kindly transport this group to Cargo Hold Seven, and the remaining refugees on the planet should go directly into the hold so we can stop dirtying my ship.
 Er... fine, and then Mister Worf can show you the ship.
 (very dry) My pleasure.
 I don't own the Enterprise, I command her.
 No. Why?
 (very dry) I felicitate you.
 (explosively) No!
 Yes!
 (to Pulaski) What is the colonists' overall condition?
 (to Worf) What's the total?
 Next question, what to do with them? Take them to a starbase? They were anachronistic in 2123. How will they cope?
 (to Riker) I wonder what they've done to my ship now.
 Unseal the doors.
 My apologies, ma'am, I was unaware that you had not been instructed in the use of the food dispensers.
 Number One, there are times in life when you have to simply bow to the absurd.
 (clearing his throat) The... ah... ship's computers sense a localized increase in --
 My condolences, Mister Worf.
 The point, Mister Odell?
 Other colony?
 Captain's log, supplemental. A review of stellar charts has revealed a Class M planet, NB2323 only half a light year from the Bringloid system. I am gambling it was the destination of the second colony.
 On screen.
 (continuing) This is Jean-Luc Picard of the United Federation vessel USS Enterprise.
 I'm afraid you were lost in the bureaucracy, but despite the lateness of our arrival we are here now, and eager to renew ties.
 Number One, form an away team.
 Captain's log, supplemental. Prime Minister Granger has requested an urgent meeting to discuss the future of the Mariposan colony.
 So they used that expertise and turned to cloning.
 A culture with no children.
 How can we help?
 I think you will find this to be the attitude of a predominate number of Enterprise people.
 Yes, of course. Number One, form away teams, and get the repairs underway.
 I finally understand. That distress satellite was left by the Mariposans as a way to protect the Bringloidi. There were two colonies on that ship.
 And not terribly relevant, I know. Still, it gives one pause for thought....
 Doctor, how desperate is the colony's situation?
 Are you saying we should give them the DNA samples they require?
 The Bringloidi.
 They started out together. It does seem only fitting that they end up together.
 Can't you understand? The Bringloidi can help you.
 Sit down! I am not going to allow brag... (a look to Danilo) ... and bigotry... (a look to Granger) ... to destroy this meeting.
 (to Granger) Commander Riker wants your laboratories inspected for any stolen tissue. I can understnad his concern, and I think we're going to have to transport all of your equipment to the Enterprise.
 (angry) All right, die!
 (gentler now) The end is closer than you'd like to think.
 Yes. But it's differences which have made us strong.
 Frightening?
 (sotto voce) I must be out of my mind.
 Miss Odell, I am --
 Miss Odell, you're the one who wanted a new home.
 That is your choice. If you wish to stay aboard the Enterprise we will drop you at a starbase, and you can go where you will.
 Brenna, you've always been the mothering force for your people. If this is going to work they'll need your wisdom and guidance.
 We have to make choices.
 He's the prime minister.
 It is.
 All squared away?
 We've done what we could. We've put the cats in the same sack, and given it a good shake.
 Engage.
 Captain's log, Stardate 42881.5. We are in orbit around Antede Three, awaiting the arrival of two dignitaries from this world.
 (continuing) Our mission is to carry them to a conference on planet Pacifica...
 (continuing) ... where their race will be given the opportunity to join the Federation.
 I thought you might find this interesting, Mister Crusher. Few humans have ever seen an Antedian in the flesh.
 Welcome. I'm Jean-Luc Picard, captain of the Enterprise.
 No, this is their preferred way of space travel.
 (to Welsey) It is a self-induced catatonic state. Their way of dealing with the trauma of spaceflight.
 Not until we reach the Pacifica conference. It's three days away. (to Pulaski) You've prepared Sickbay facilities for holding them, Doctor?
 (to Worf) Provide security.
 A point well taken. I'm sure that to the Antedians, we're equally unattractive.
 What is the problem?
 It will be nice to have her as a guest of the Enterprise again.
 Energize.
 (to Riker, resignedly) Explain.
 It would be hard to forget Mister Homn. Welcome back to the Enterprise.
 Certainly.
 I won't interfere with Homn's duties this time.
 I trust you'll be comfortable here, Mrs. Troi. Now if you'll excuse me, I must get back to my duties.
 (after a hesitation) Of course. It, uh, sounds delightful.
 We must not lose sight of the fact that we're talking about someone who has been granted ambassadorial rank. Even if she appears a bit eccentric, Lwaxana Troi must be treated with appropriate respect. Is that understood?
 (waits) Except what, Mister Data?
 (to Riker) See that every bridge officer and supervisor has the full text of that transmission.
 Picard to Pulaski. When was the last time you looked in on our Antedian guests?
 Are they still catatonic?
 Understood. Keep me informed -- Picard out.
 I believe I'll get some rest. (exiting; to Riker) It will be a dress uniform dinner, gentlemen.
 You're not attending the dinner with us this evening, Doctor?
 Tell me Mister Homn, when will the others be arriving?
 (continuing) The other officers? (pause) Commander Riker? Deanna?
 (clinks glass) Speaking for the men of Earth, which is an awesome responsibility indeed, I thank you.
 (a bit worried) You do?
 (shaking head) Well actually I wasn't --
 I must admit, I wasn't expecting this... setting. I assumed that my high-ranking officers would also be attending.
 Oh yes, you're giving thanks for your food. I'd forgotten about that. (pause) I wonder how many other cultures have similar customs.
 Let's find out. (touches his communicator) Commander Data.
 Mrs. Troi and I are having a very interesting discussion about the various ways by which societies give thanks. For instance, the Betazoids use of the chime.
 (overlapping) Commander, this is absolutely fascinating, don't you agree, Mrs. Troi? Data, if your duties permit, why don't you join us for dessert?
 You don't have to eat to join us, Commander. I'm sure Mrs. Troi would simply enjoy the pleasure of your company.
 Because... because of his wonderful after-dinner conversation. His anecdotes are the stuff of legends aboard this ship.
 Fascinating, Data. I'm sure Mrs. Troi would love to hear the one about the, uh, anomalous chemical composition of... say... brown dwarf stars.
 (rising) No, as a matter of fact, I need to get back to the bridge myself.
 (a bit stiff) Thank you for a delicious meal. Let's uh, do it again sometime.
 (exhaling) Data, you'll never know just how much I owe you for that.
 What's our e.t.a. to the conference?
 Very good, Number One. I'll be in my Ready Room.
 I was what?!
 (continuing) I tell you Deanna, for a telepath, your mother's accuracy leaves much to be desired.
 Don't misunderstand me, Counselor. Your mother is a beautiful person...
 I am not amused, Number One. (starts pacing again) There must be a way to convince her that it's quite impossible -- without offending her.
 Well, considering Starfleet's orders not to get her upset, I think it might be prudent for me to make myself less available for the duration of this journey.
 Setting: San Francisco California, United States Of America, the year 1945 A.D., program to fit the novel, "The Long Dark Tunnel".
 Dixon Hill's memoirs: date, the 1940's...
 (continuing) It was a grey day in the city by the bay. My pockets were as empty as a press agent's heart. I needed a case, that's for sure, but the private dick racket was as slow as the horse I just blew my last two bucks on.
 (pleased) Hello, it's good to see you again.
 New cases?
 (thoughtful) I see... Well, pay the tailor and stall the landlord.
 Thank you, Madeline.
 Yes, as the book said, everything about you is big: big shoulders... big neck... big fists...
 Says so on my door, doesn't it?
 Let me guess -- you want dance lessons.
 Yes... yes, I understand that. No funny things.
 Alva? Let's see -- I'll bet she's your sister...
 Take it easy, Mac! I can't take the job of finding Alva if you break me like a matchstick.
 (continuing; straightening tie) As a matter of fact, I knew who Alva was all along. I've read the book.
 (to Slade) You got a picture?
 Of course of Alva! The novel wasn't illustrated.
 I believe the 1940 expression was "hubbah, hubbah, hubbah."
 That's part of the cost of hiring a private eye like me, Slade. I'm very different from most you could get.
 (nods) Okay. I'll find Alva for you; but you might not like what I find.
 This is so much fun.
 Twenty dollars a day, plus expenses. Fifty when I find her.
 You know it's wonderful to need money.
 Let's see... I must have been skimming pages about here. What part did you play?
 Ah, yes, of course.
 My, my, time does fly in the Holodeck.
 (continuing) Even if I happen to know a Slade Bender, why should I help you?
 I knew you'd say something like that. Marvelous.
 I don't think so.
 No, the gun misfired. Thankfully the Holodeck is handling it correctly and the mortality failsafe is functional.
 (continuing) But in some ways, the program is almost too accurate.
 Don't worry about it. (shrugs) I'm going out for a drink.
 You must be Rex. Am I right?
 (sitting at bar) You're right, I do need a drink.
 (smiling, nodding) Let's see... Scotch, neat?
 (macho) So? I've got plenty more where that came from.
 Uggh, I'm going to have to get used to that.
 What the hell... make it four.
 (pulls out a bill) Cash! I just took on a case.
 It's hard to believe, Rex.
 I recognize the size of the shadow. (MORE)
 (speaking, without turning around) Hello Slade. Buy you a drink?
 I'm working on it.
 She could be anywhere, Slade. You can't expect me to find her in one afternoon.
 (surprised) Has it really? What I mean is -- you gotta have patience. I'll find her; I guarantee it.
 Easy Slade. They're friends of mine.
 -- Call me Dixon.
 Well then, it's time to go.
 Sure, I can afford another round.
 These are my associates... (indicates Riker) "Nails", from Chicago. (indicates Data) And --
 (indicating Riker) Actually, that's the first officer's job.
 I don't suppose you have.
 That's because...
 I think it's only fair, but let's allow her the moment.
 Go ahead, Doctor.
 Understood.
 What's their condition?
 Coming, Mrs. Troi?
 Mrs. Troi, your government expects us to deliver you to the conference and I intend to do that!
 There is something about Rex I think you had better know...
 Take them to level five. Disarm them and hold for questioning.
 Good-bye Mrs. Troi... and thank you.
 female: ENSIGN CLANCEY. Riker, Data, and Worf ENTER and take their stations; Data relieves the supernumerary at Ops, examines readouts.
 Mister Data?
 Warp eight. (to Riker) Whenever Starfleet gets enigmatic, I know we're about to face a challenge.
 Engage.
 That area was colonized fairly recently, as I recall.
 Any problems reported in that area?
 Then what the devil's going on?
 It's about time. On screen.
 My compliments, Admiral Gromek.
 Understood. And -- the mission?
 Can you give me any details?
 Admiral, I find it difficult to prepare for a mission I know nothing about.
 Indeed?
 (thinking) True, Number One. But if the sensors and transmitters were removed and life-support installed, there would be just enough space for one person.
 Obviously Starfleet feels that time is of the essence.
 (to Clancey) We'll need an intercept course with pin-point accuracy. The probe carrying the emissary has no means of navigation...
 Proceed.
 Risks?
 So it's a gamble. (a beat) Odds, gentlemen?
 Make it so.
 Increase to warp eight point nine.
 Full sensors, aft.
 Adjust speed to intercept.
 (to com panel) Mister La Forge?
 Steady as she goes...
 Engage tractor.
 Energize.
 Acknowledged. Number One?
 (to Clancey) Resume original course and speed.
 Well done, everyone.
 Welcome aboard. I'm Jean-Luc Picard. (introducing) Counselor Troi, Lieutenant Commander Data, and --
 Which suggests that the crew was in cryogenic sleep for most of the long voyage.
 So our task is to find the ship, and tell the Klingons we are no longer at war.
 (calmly) No.
 Find me another choice. I want some options -- and I want them before we encounter the Klingon ship. (to Worf) Lieutenant, I'm assigning you to help the emissary. Dismissed.
 Lieutenant?
 Are there personal reasons you don't want the assignment?
 Any professional reasons?
 Good.
 Status.
 Lieutenant?
 Lieutenant, I commend your diligence. However, I'm concerned that you're working yourself too hard.
 (cuts him off) Lieutenant -- I order you to relax.
 I've never seen the Lieutenant so... unsettled.
 Slow to impulse.
 Lay in a standard search pattern.
 Full impulse. Engage.
 Agreed. No outpost in this sector could defend itself against a Klingon warship.
 (to Geordi) Is that feasible?
 Could the T'Ong be disabled rather than destroyed?
 I will not accept that. There must be a way to make the Klingons listen. If we can only convince them --
 Plot an intercept course. And go to Yellow Alert.
 Hold this position. Let's see if they've spotted us. (to Data) Magnification one hundred.
 Mister Data?
 Can you find them?
 (to Clancey) Intercept. Warp two.
 Helm -- stay with them.
 Overtake. Warp eight.
 Put us right in their path and come to a full stop. (to Tactical) Full power to shields.
 We've thrown down the gauntlet... let's see if they pick it up.
 Compensate.
 Agreed. Let's give them the chance to look their enemy in the face.
 Ready, Lieutenant? (then to Tactical) Open a hailing frequency.
 Thank you and congratulations, Lieutenant. A very fine first command. Well done.
 Captain's log, Stardate 42923.7. We are en route to the Braslota System, site of the first Starfleet battle simulation. Joining the Enterprise as observer and mediator is the Zakdorn Master Strategist, Sirna Kolrami. Despite misgivings, I have agreed to Starfleet's request that we take part in these wargame exercises.
 (rising, extending his hand) Mister Kolrami -- Captain Jean-Luc Picard. Welcome aboard.
 Would you care to be shown to your quarters?
 Commander Riker will captain the Hathaway.
 Yes.
 Starfleet is not a military organization. Our purpose is exploration.
 Because with the Borg threat, I have decided that my officers and I need to hone our tactical skills.
 In a crisis situation, it is prudent to have several options.
 Well, Number One, you are allowed a complement of forty. Select whom you will. Save Data, who will serve as my first officer in your absence.
 On my ship, the leader of an away team has total control of the mission. If you want to judge "leadership" -- why not start at the beginning?
 (admonishingly) Now, Doctor...
 Begin long-range scanning of all sectors within three light years of Braslota. (seeing Riker) How is your crew shaping up?
 (playing along) Anyone in mind?
 (keeping it light) Commander Riker -- (re: Hathaway) There is your next challenge.
 (playful) Until we test our mettle on the field of honor.
 (chuckles) Good luck, Number One... Captain.
 Open.
 The weapons conversion, Lieutenant Burke?
 Screen off. Data, you have the bridge.
 On screen.
 Why?
 Have you any objection?
 (to Riker) Permission granted. (to Burke) Mister Burke, handle that.
 Where is Commander Data?
 How so?
 Mister Kolrami -- may I speak with you in private?
 I would like to know the root of your prejudice for my second-in-command.
 Mister Kolrami -- you have been nothing but denigrating and abusive of Commander Riker since boarding this ship. I should like an explanation.
 In what regard?
 (ice frosting the words) Don't confuse style with intent. Only a fool would question Commander Riker's dedication to Starfleet and the men and women under his command. Riker is the finest officer I have ever served with.
 The test is if a crew will follow where Commander Riker leads. His joviality is the way he creates that loyalty. And I'll match his command style against your statistics anytime.
 Now, let me see if I fully understand this. You're suggesting that Commander Data is suffering from a profound loss of confidence, and you feel that only I can restore the balance.
 Don't you think you both might be overreacting? Data is not capable of the emotions you are assigning to him.
 I am less than an hour away from a battle simulation, and I must handhold an android?
 Commander, I require your presence on the bridge.
 (interrupting) Data, you are my first officer.
 Yes, you might. But that does not alter your duty -- to this ship, and to me. (a beat) Do you know how to formulate a premise?
 Then formulate one now: How do I handle Riker and the Hathaway? I'll await your answer on the bridge.
 (continuing) Commander, it is possible to commit no mistakes -- and still lose. (MORE)
 (strong beat) That is not a weakness. That is "life".
 And Data, leave the hesitation and self-doubt in your quarters.
 Screen on.
 The hunt begins, Number One.
 (to Conn) Screen off. Set course two-two-three mark two-five-seven, full impulse power. Initiate Kumeh maneuver.
 Course three-one-seven mark seven-three. Present minimal aspect. Ready warp one, optimal spread on simulated torpedoes.
 What the -- ?!
 (standing; to Conn) Bring us about, Ensign -- maximum shields!
 Weapon-systems full -- lock on! Open a hailing frequency.
 Warp three, evasive! (the "scores" stop) Disengage weapons, re-engage modified beam.
 He is the best!
 Mister Worf must have overridden our sensor codes and played some holographic games. Data, input a new code. (MORE)
 (beat) Attack posture, circumvental attitude. Prepare beams for photon mode.
 Ready photon torpedoes.
 Did you input that new code?
 Mister Worf -- I didn't give you enough credit, continue the simulation.
 Divert all power to shields!
 Stay between the Hathaway and the Ferengi!
 Where are my weapons?
 Unacceptable! I have crew on the Hathaway.
 I have forty crewmembers --
 Not to me! (to Burke) Notify Starfleet -- priority. Hail Ferengi on my command. (to Data) Formulate alternatives.
 (thundering) I am the captain of this vessel! Your order is nullified!
 (continuing) Ferengi on Main Viewer.
 I am Jean-Luc Picard, Captain of the Federation Starship, USS Enterprise. Why have you attacked my ship?
 I have refrained from launching a counter-attack in the hope that we can resolve this peacefully.
 Data?
 Captain's log, supplemental. Due to a grave miscalculation on my part, the Enterprise has been subjected to a withering attack by the Ferengi. I find myself with little time to decide the fate of forty of my crew stranded aboard the derelict Hathaway.
 I'm open to suggestions.
 On screen. Have you been monitoring communications, Number One?
 You will be left defenseless.
 Your what?!
 (formulating an idea) I told you he was the best. (to Riker) I should wish to hear about this later, but now I need to work something out with Data.
 (cutting him off) There is a way. Are you with us, Number One?
 Data.
 Captain Riker, I can't order you to do this...
 The advantage is that it will appear from the Kreechta's perspective -- as though you were destroyed in the explosion.
 Then we are agreed; on my mark in four minutes.
 Are we ready, Number One?
 Good luck to both of you. (beat; to Burke) Bractor.
 You needn't, Bractor. The answer -- is "no." (beat) Your actions have been wholly criminal, and you will not profit by them.
 You feel the Hathaway has value? Well, I deny you your prize. (MORE)
 (to Burke) Fire!
 You had no claim to that ship -- it was ours to destroy.
 (unperturbed) You can try.
 You made it, Number One. Smooth ride?
 We'll lock on and pick you up.
 Thank you, Mister Kolrami. (to the crew) Initiate recovery procedures, continue repairs, plot a course for the nearest starbase.
 Captain's log, supplemental. With the transporter repaired and my crew safely back aboard, we have officially ended the first Starfleet battle simulation.
 Captain's log, Stardate 42976.1. During a geological survey of Surata Four, Commander Riker has become infected by an unidentified microbe.
 Number One.
 Put your foot where it didn't belong, did you?
 Can you remove it?
 (to Pulaski) Your prognosis?
 And if it interfered with neural activity there...
 How can I help?
 And for that, you need a sample.
 Mister Data, Mister La Forge -- prepare to beam down to the planet.
 Get it to Sickbay right away.
 Report.
 To what end?
 Go on.
 Then they infect animals in order to kill them.
 Unfortunately, Mister Data, your hypotheses rarely are.
 There's nothing that will cure this infection?
 Or how to kill it.
 I know you're doing your best...
 Comfortable?
 I wish you were faking it. I've seen the thorn, Number One.
 But deadly. (a beat) I'm sorry.
 When you least expect them.
 And now and then we are humbled... reminded that the universe contains much that is beautiful... and much that is malevolent.
 A worthy lesson. I admire your lack of rancor, Number One.
 Anything?
 Doctor, we're running out of time.
 You're right. I don't need to remind you of your duties. I didn't mean to give offense.
 Aye aye, Doctor.
 In which case, let's hold position for a while, Number One. This is worth studying.
 (smiles) And that the sun revolved around the Earth...
 "Beyond this place there be dragons... " It was even said that crews would threaten to hang their captain from the yardarm if they refused to turn back.
 How comforting, Number One.
 Status, Doctor?
 Can you bring her back?
 Gone?
 Thank you, Lieutenant.
 Apparently so.
 I'm beaming you up!
 Let him go.
 I will not be coerced.
 (calmly) No you won't. You're not a killer.
 Report, Number One.
 (tense, tight) What just happened down there? Number One! Report!
 Report! Report!
 Is he alive?
 Set auto-destruct sequence.
 Let's go. The only place we can stop the count is from the bridge.
 Data, on any heading -- warp six -- now!
 I don't believe it, Number One. It could still be part of the illusion. Data, report.
 Go ahead, Doctor.
 I'm on my way.
 Delighted you're feeling better, Captain. (re: Data) The admiral and I were worried about you.
 Oh?
 Excessive honesty can be disastrous... particularly in a commander.
 Knowing your limitations is one thing. Advertising them to a crew can damage your ability to lead.
 On screen.
 What the devil --
 Cancel message.
 Humans can't survive in such an environment. Exposure to hyperonic radiation is fatal.
 No, Number One. The Sheliak haven't broken a century of silence to send us after phantoms. An investigation is in order. Set course for Tau Cygna Five.
 Numbers?
 Well, whoever they are and however they've survived, we've got to get them off the planet.
 ... who are within their rights to demand the removal of these "trespassers."
 Mister Data. As you are unaffected by hyperonic radiation, you will go to the planet via shuttlecraft and commence evacuation procedures.
 Any speculation as to what he'll find, Number One?
 What carried the Artemis so far off course?
 Understood. How many are there?
 Shuttles?
 Then we need more time. Mister Data, prepare the colonists for an evacuation.
 (continuing) Mister Worf, get me the Sheliak.
 I need the transporters to function despite the hyperonic radiation.
 Thee... and me.
 Try again. Boost signal strength.
 Conversation is necessary if we are to find a solution to our mutual problem.
 Both parties are involved, sir.
 I apologize for our inadvertent violation of the treaty.
 Let us negotiate in good faith...
 There is a thriving colony on the planet. Rather than uproot these people may I offer a compromise?
 Why?!
 This is not a law. It is a treaty. It is designed to smooth relations between peoples. Not to act as a strait...
 ... jacket.
 The Sheliak won't bargain.
 I'm contacting Starfleet to arrange for transport. Get those people prepared for evacuation. We may have to move very quickly.
 Three weeks. Starfleet is profuse in their apologies, but it will still be three weeks.
 Until the arrival of a colony transport ship equipped with dedicated personnel shuttles.
 The Sheliak must agree to extend our deadline.
 If they plan to settle Tau Cygna Five two days from now...
 (decides) We're going to intercept that ship.
 We have to take the risk.
 (you will get it done) How are we progressing, Mister La Forge?
 (get it done) Splendid.
 We must have something in common. We communicate.
 (have we tried?) Telepaths?
 This is ludicrous!
 Cup? Glass?
 Point taken.
 On my way. (to Troi) So it begins.
 Open hailing frequencies. This is Captain Jean-Luc Picard of the Starship Enterprise.
 We desire face-to-face negotiation to settle the crisis on Tau Cygna Five.
 (continuing) We are entitled to consultation under paragraph five hundred and sixty-three subparagraph nine.
 I'm going to take it as such. Number One, you have the bridge.
 Director, we will comply with your request to remove the colony on Tau Cygna Five, but we need time.
 I'm trying! But the needed ship won't be available for three weeks.
 I have admitted that! I'm only asking for a little tolerance.
 We will remove them. But you must grant us the time we require.
 (outraged) They are not vermin! They are citizens of the Federation and I will not permit this travesty!
 Between intelligent species of good will --
 (to Worf) Go to Yellow Alert. Shields up.
 Mister Riker, put us nose to nose with the Sheliak ship. If she makes a move, match it.
 Open a hailing frequency.
 (tight control) They don't have to answer. They just have to listen! Sheliak vessel, you will have to go through me to get at the colony on Tau Cygna Five!
 Close channel -- and get me that treaty! They've been beating us over the head with it for three days. Let's see if we can't find something in it that can be turned to our advantage.
 That's it.
 Worf, get me the Sheliak.
 Pursuant to paragraph one thousand two hundred and ninety I formally request third party arbitration of our dispute.
 And further, pursuant to subsection D, three, I name the Grizzelas to arbitrate.
 Unfortunately they are currently in their hibernation cycle, but they'll awaken in six months, and then we'll get this matter settled. Now, do you want to wait... or give me my three weeks?
 Then I declare the treaty in abeyance!
 You're damn right.
 (a beat) On screen.
 (with careful enunciation) Thank you.
 Excellent.
 (dryly) Mister La Forge, I believe we will postpone.
 Come.
 Welcome home, Mister Data. Well done.
 The good doctor was kind enough to provide me with a recording of your concert. Your performance shows a good deal of feeling.
 That's hard to believe; your playing is quite beautiful.
 And is there nothing of Data in what I'm hearing?
 You chose the violinists. Heifetz and Bron-Ken had radically different styles, but you combined them -- successfully.
 Mister Data... I look forward to your next concert.
 Captain's log, Stardate 43102.8. We have entered a spectacular double star system in the Kavis Alpha sector on a most critical mission of astro-physical research.
 (continuing) Our eminent guest, Doctor Paul Stubbs, will attempt to study the decay of globules of neutronium expelled at relativistic speeds by a massive stellar explosion which will occur here in a matter of hours.
 (continuing) It is virtually a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity as dictated by the forces of nature. But frankly, Doctor Stubbs seems much calmer about it all than those of us who are simply charged with the responsibility of delivery and observation.
 
 Doctor Stubbs, if you want to make a final inspection of the unit...
 Begin launch sequence.
 Stabilize.
 Shields up.
 Go to manual override to raise shields.
 Reverse impulse engines.
 The momentum is still taking us into the path of the stellar matter.
 Computer, explanation for control malfunction.
 Run a level one diagnostic series. We need a computer that's one hundred percent to run Doctor Stubbs' experiment.
 (continuing) ... As well as the food slots in Sickbay.
 (sitting) What can I do for you, Doctor?
 If you're concerned about Wesley, I see no evidence that there's a problem.
 Beverly, this is simply a matter of time. I know how difficult it was to be away.
 He's... become a fine officer. He works as hard as any member of the crew... Riker says his studies...
 He seems well adjusted...
 His dependence? (beat, as she considers) He is seventeen, Beverly.
 Getting into a lot more trouble than Wesley is, I can assure you.
 (urgent) Still no visual contact? Impossible... Mister Worf, same magnification. Fifty degrees starboard.
 Evasive action.
 Predict current vector of the Borg ship.
 You're telling me this was another computer glitch?
 Computer, identify malfunction immediately.
 Lieutenant Worf, you will accompany Commander La Forge. I want a full report on the prospects for getting our shields back. Commanders Data and Riker will join me in the conference room to consider the future of this mission... if there is one.
 The fact of the matter is we're dealing with a potential breakdown of our main computer...
 Of course, Doctor. Sit down. (join us) Counselor...
 (continuing) Commander La Forge is attempting repairs as we speak...
 Doctor, if it is at all possible, we will continue this mission as planned.
 (sharp) Nevertheless, my first and foremost concern will be to insure the safety of this ship and its crew...
 My dear Doctor, in our current position, when that star explodes, you'll get to watch your experiment from the inside out.
 I don't believe you speak for the majority, Doctor.
 Continue to advise.
 Even my sensory perception picked that up today...
 Advise everyone to remain in their quarters when not on duty. Protocol "B" access to all power components. Nobody else uses them unless it's cleared by Commander Riker.
 They also showed a Borg vessel that did not exist. Counselor Troi?
 Data, stay on the sensors... see if we can't pick up something out there.
 They're not just trying, Number One. If it's true, they're doing a damn good job of it.
 Captain's log, supplemental. Our computer core has clearly been tampered with and yet there is no sign of a breach of security on board.
 We have even considered sabotage, but Counselor Troi has not detected any such sentiments. We have engines back and will attempt to complete our mission... but without a reliable computer, Doctor Stubbs' experiment is in serious jeopardy.
 Proceed.
 What in heaven's name... ?
 Yes... yes... I know...
 Shut off the power to the bridge.
 We may be fighting a different kind of enemy than we've ever known... an enemy that fights a war of nerves. (beat) Resume power to the bridge.
 (continuing) Commander La Forge, can you get us out of this star system safely...
 Do it gently. But do it.
 The priority is to find out who or what is doing this and why. (MORE)
 (Riker acknowledges, EXITS) Those of us not involved in that detail should get a few minutes rest. Commander Data, the bridge, or what's left of it, is yours.
 School... project...
 (continuing) Just how far have these things... evolved?
 How many generations are we dealing with here?
 (understatement) A few. (beat) Can it be possible that they know what they're doing...
 I cannot exterminate... something that "may or may not" be intelligent.
 (sharp) There is still time. (beat) Ensign Crusher, work with Data to find some way to remove them safely. If things get worse, we'll take stronger measures.
 I can't get the story of David and Goliath out of my head. How long do we wait, Number One?
 Do you smell a change in...
 (to com) Picard to La Forge... enviromental system malfunction on the bridge... acknowledge...
 If you were a member of my crew, sir, I would...
 If one man, woman or child on my ship dies because of your experiment... I will have your head before the highest command of the Federation...
 Lieutenant Worf, Doctor Stubbs is to be restricted to his quarters until further notice.
 Data, can you find me a way to communicate with these things?
 Proceed.
 I have to believe this was not an arbitrary attack...
 Commander Riker, on my signal, we will gamma-irradiate all computer systems throughout the Enterprise to end this conflict.
 Can we actually talk to them yet?
 Ask them for a cease-fire... put it in whatever words you think they'll understand.
 Tell them it is critical to their survival as well as our own.
 Bring Doctor Stubbs to the bridge.
 I don't think there's much chance of that here.
 Tell them the human who destroyed their comrades is here and wishes to address them...
 And you, sir will explain your error and apologize and pray that we can negotiate a peace we can all live with... is that clear?
 How do we know we'll ever get them out of you, Data...
 All right. Propose it to the nanites.
 Proceed.
 In our travels, we have encountered many other creatures... even stranger-looking than we are... and all of us try to co-exist peacefully.
 We misinterpreted your actions as an attack against us.
 Yes, but you endangered the vessel in which we all travel.
 You almost killed a crewmember.
 We understand. We are also explorers and we mean no harm to any life-form.
 He asks you to forgive him. This conflict was started by mistakes... on both sides. Let us end it here and now.
 I pledge to you that we will provide any assistance you need for your continued survival.
 Captain's log, Stardate 43104.7. Doctor Stubbs has generously used his influence to arrange the designation of planet Kavis-Alpha-Four as the new home of the Nanite Civilization. Plans to negotiate a treaty are underway. (MORE)
 Commander Data's neural network has been vacated... He has been returned to us, unharmed, and with the help of the nanites, our computer core has been reconstructed in time for the experiment...
 Doctor?
 Captain's log, Stardate 43042.3. We are cautiously entering the Delta Rana star system three days after receiving a distress call from the Federation colony on its ninth planet.
 The garbled transmission reported the colony under attack from an unidentified spacecraft. Our mission is one of rescue and -- if necessary -- confrontation with a hostile force.
 They could be cloaked or otherwise shielded. (MORE)
 Mister Crusher, bring us in well clear of the planet's three moons.
 Mister Data, put the planet on the Main Viewer.
 Magnify.
 (hopeful) Life?
 Put the area on the Main Viewer and magnify.
 Number One, I think you had better see who's home...
 (to Troi) Counselor... ?
 And something else... ?
 Good luck, Number One.
 Are they collaborators? Did they in fact provide their colony's assailants with something that abetted the total destruction of Rana Four in order to protect their own lives?
 We have no idea what the enemy needed, Doctor. Love, fear, hope -- a cup of tea. It is a strange universe we live in.
 (looks to Troi) Counselor... ?
 (continuing) Counselor Troi... ?
 (thinks) No. The assailants would have picked someone younger for that, someone who would have given them a proper show for their money.
 (continuing) Number One, you say the couple is incapable of sustaining themselves?
 They won't come to the ship?
 We'll do all that we can to help them... but in the meantime I want them kept under surveillance.
 (continuing) Counselor, is something wrong?
 By all means.
 I remember a Starfleet admiral saying the same thing about some renegade Andorians in the Triangulum system once. The truth was they'd dismantled their ship and hidden it.
 I was concerned. I came to see if I could be of any help.
 I don't have your gift for reading emotions, Counselor, but I can tell when someone is in pain and hiding it.
 (thinks he understands) Perhaps it's a symptom of fatigue. We've all been inflicted one time or another with the song that wouldn't quit.
 When did this start?
 Rishon and Kevin... And?
 Get some rest. Take the necessary sleep inducements if you have to.
 Where did that come from?
 Lieutenant Worf... ?
 Open a hailing frequency, Data. Ask them to identify themselves and to match orbit with us.
 Worf, maximum shields, ready all weapon systems.
 Worf, fire phasers... Just a warning shot. Data, repeat the order to stand to.
 Helm, initiate pursuit.
 I get the impression we're being toyed with, Number One.
 (continuing) This ship will not chase a pony on a merry-go-round. Number One, take us back to Rana Four.
 We have unfinished business there. I need to have a talk with those two people.
 Good afternoon. I apologize if I startled you. I'm Jean-Luc Picard, captain of the Enterprise. (indicates replicator) I've brought you something you badly need if you're going to stay on Rana -- a matter replicator. It has limited capabilities, but...
 It will provide you with food and clothing -- clean water. Lieutenant Worf can instruct you in its operation.
 We'd like that very much.
 (to Rishon) Why did you leave Earth and move to a brand new world when you did?
 It must've been terrible... when the colony was fighting for its life.
 But you survived...
 I don't have an answer for that. A few hours ago we had an encounter with a warship... Possibly the one which attacked you. We forced it to leave the system but were unable to affect it otherwise. It could return.
 (fully alert) Do you know that for a fact, Kevin?
 But there had to have been a reason. In some way you and Rishon were "different" from the other colonists. Your geographical location, your philosophical beliefs, the color of your eyes -- somehow you stood apart from them.
 That is your protected right.
 What about you, Rishon? Did you feel the same way?
 Before we go I ask you one more time to come to the ship. For your own safety.
 I am not surprised. Lieutenant Worf, open a hailing frequency. Warn the vessel to stay clear of the planet.
 Damage?
 Number One, we have been exemplary in our patience.
 Mister Crusher, move the Enterprise out of range of the attacking vessel!
 We can't help them... But it's my guess they're in no danger.
 Number of casualties?
 Fatalities?
 Can you help her?
 Could it be telepathic?
 (controlled anger) They're blocking her sensitivity ... keeping her from "seeing" the truth.
 Rishon and Kevin.
 They wanted us to leave Rana... and that's exactly what we're doing.
 (continuing) Picard to bridge.
 Number One, I want you to maintain the present course for another hour, then turn the Enterprise around and take it back to Rana Four.
 We're going back, Commander -- and this time nothing is going to lure us away.
 Forget your previous error, Lieutenant. There was no way you could have prevented it.
 Lieutenant Worf. If you will accompany me to the Transporter Room...
 I disagree, Commander. I don't think it knows we're here. I think it believes it's run us off for good. That, however, will change once I'm back on board.
 It's protecting Rishon and Kevin. It responds to their wishes -- directly or indirectly, I'm not sure. That's what I'm going to put to the test.
 Celebrating?
 This is the second time you've shown surprise at my appearance, Kevin. The first time was understandable, but why now? -- unless you expected never to see me again.
 It isn't my intention to interfere, Kevin... only to help you and Rishon.
 I promise you that once I leave this house I will never set foot in it again. The Enterprise, however, will remain in orbit over this planet.
 To protect you.
 But it is necessary, Kevin. Your lives are in great danger. The warship has returned.
 (in Kevin's face) We fought a pitched battle with it and lost. Many of my crew have been injured -- including a woman who's mind is slowly being destroyed by a telepathic aberration.
 You, Kevin? What about Rishon? Is she in favor of being left at the mercy of a homicidal spaceship?
 Come to the Enterprise, Rishon. Let me take you where you'll be safe.
 (at Kevin) Then explain to me why you're safe, Kevin. Why is this house a sanctuary from a destructive force that otherwise has no conscience? Does it have to do with you -- with your refusal to fight?
 (continuing) Tell me this, Kevin. If Rishon were in danger, would you kill to save her life?
 It is my sworn duty to protect you. The Enterprise will remain in orbit around Rana Four as long as the two of you are alive.
 Number One -- an update, please.
 That's of no concern, Number One. It's here. And precisely on schedule.
 Belay those orders, Mister Worf.
 Let it come, Commander. Activate the Main Viewer.
 The Enterprise will stand its ground, Lieutenant.
 When I give the order. Not before.
 Understood.
 There will be no interference from us, Mister Data.
 Scan for survivors, Lieutenant.
 Ready a photon torpedo. Fire at the vessel when ready.
 Commander Riker. What reason does the Enterprise have to remain at Rana?
 Good. Helm, move us to a higher orbit so that we may keep the surface of the planet under surveillance.
 Anything. If I'm needed I will be in my Ready Room. That is all for now.
 Come.
 (a smile) The pleasure is mine, Number One.
 I have acted on an assumption, Commander. I am not sure what the result will be -- or even that my assumption is correct. (beat) We found two people alive in a house on a devastated planet. But there was only one survivor of the war on Rana Four
 (a smile) Worf, do you see survivors?
 Helm, bring us into transporter range. I want them beamed aboard -- directly to the bridge.
 Let them.
 (continuing) My apologies if I interrupted a waltz...
 To end the suffering of one of my crewmembers.
 Kevin does. He's the cause.
 (continuing) At first I couldn't figure out why your house had survived the holocaust while all the others hadn't. And then it occurred to me that it had been destroyed. The dwelling where you served me tea and danced your waltzes was a reproduction, something real to the touch but capable of being created and destroyed and recreated at whim.
 (to Kevin) More than anything, you wanted the Enterprise away from Rana. Why? (MORE)
 Because the house, the plot of land, your very own existence, were riddles you were helpless to explain. The warship -- another recreation -- twice tried to chase us away but failed. When I came to the house a second time I provided you with the only condition that would make the Enterprise leave -- your deaths -- and you did your best to satisfy me.
 Take you to the nearest starbase where you will be held accountable for the attack on this ship... and perhaps the deaths of eleven thousand people.
 But you haven't told us the whole story, Kevin -- how it ended... the part about Rishon.
 I can touch you, Rishon. Hear your voice. Smell your perfume. In every respect you are a real person with your own mind and your own beliefs... but you do not exist. You died with the others, defending the colony. He has recreated you just as he has recreated the house.
 (continuing) You're the only living thing that really exists on Rana Four, Kevin. And though you look human, you're not.
 Let him go.
 So dangerous, Lieutenant, he could have destroyed us at any instant he wished. Track him. Alert the crew to keep out of his way. I want him to know we mean him no harm...
 Not if he's the creature of conscience I think he is. He has someone to help first...
 What happened on Rana Four, Kevin? The truth this time -- all of it.
 Your colony was attacked by a warship...
 So you let the colonists fight a hopeless battle.
 And then what you feared most happened. Rishon went to fight with the others -- and she died with them.
 But you couldn't. You did the unthinkable instead. You took revenge.
 We are not qualified to be your judges. We have no law to fit your crime. You're free to return to the planet... and to make Rishon live again.
 Captain's log, Stardate 43043.5. We are departing the Rana system for Starbase one three three. We leave behind a being of extraordinary power... and conscience. I am not certain if he should be praised or condemned. Only that he should be left alone...
 Captain's log, Stardate 43125.2. We are en route to Mintaka Three, where a three-man Federation anthropological field team has been studying the inhabitants.
 are at their stations; SUPERNUMERARIES as needed.
 Our mission is to resupply the outpost and repair their malfunctioning reactor.
 Report, Mister La Forge.
 (nods) The anthropologists are studying an extended family of Mintakans at close range... from a camouflaged observation post.
 (nods) Not surprising, considering how closely their evolution has paralleled Vulcan.
 On screen.
 Do you have battery backup?
 Make it so. (to Barron) We're on our way --
 Increase to warp nine.
 Then why didn't you let him die?
 I don't know if I concur with that reasoning, Doctor. But now that he's here, you must remove all memory of his encounter with the away team.
 It's been accomplished before.
 Doctor Warren is here. We're doing all we can.
 Still on Mintaka Three.
 We will.
 Rest assured -- we will not leave until we locate Palmer.
 Picard to bridge. Report.
 Very well. Take us into a close orbit.
 I want that four percent, Lieutenant.
 Picard out.
 Doctor, your next task is clear.
 So if Palmer, in his delirium, fled into a cave, we might be unable to detect his life signs.
 Agreed. Further contamination must be prevented.
 Go ahead, Number One.
 The contamination?
 It's not that simple. He's surrounded by Mintakans. If he dematerializes before their eyes...
 Number One -- is there any chance of your freeing Palmer and transporting up unseen?
 Try hard. Picard out.
 I'm aware of that. But each of us -- including Doctor Palmer -- took an oath to uphold the Prime Directive... if necessary, with our lives.
 (to Barron) You believe the Mintakans are capable of harming Troi?
 Recommendations?
 Are you suggesting...
 Out of the question. The Prime Directive --
 By sanctioning their false beliefs?
 I cannot -- I will not impose a set of commandments on these people. To do so violates the essence of the Prime Directive.
 Your own reports describe how rational these people are. Millennia ago, they abandoned all belief in the supernatural. And now you're asking me to sabotage that achievement... send them back into the Dark Ages of fear and superstition. (adamant) No. We must undo the damage we've caused. (turning to Riker) Number One -- tell me about the group's leader.
 ... she might be able to persuade the others.
 She sees the Picard as a magical figure. I'm going to show her how the magic works. (a beat) Bring her aboard.
 Data, when sensors indicate she's alone, beam her to Transporter Room One.
 Ensign Hoy, I'll handle this.
 Nuria -- don't be afraid.
 No one's going to harm you.
 My name is Jean-Luc Picard.
 Please -- get up.
 Get up! You don't kneel to me.
 I do not deserve it.
 Look at me. Feel the warmth of my hand, the rhythm of my pulse. I am not a supreme being -- I am flesh and blood, like you.
 Like you! Different in appearance, yes. But we are both living beings -- we are born, we grow, we live, we die. In all the ways that matter, we are alike.
 Let me show you my people. (ALTERNATE:) Let me show you something.
 It is wondrous -- but not miraculous. The doors merely work differently from the ones you know.
 Seen from far, far above.
 Nuria -- your people live in huts. Was it always so?
 Why do you now live in huts?
 If huts are better, why did your people ever live in caves?
 (nods) Just as there was a time when you didn't know how to make cloth -- or bows.
 Someone invented huts. Someone invented the bow. And they taught others, who taught their children, who taught their children's children...
 Now suppose one of your cave-dwelling ancestors could see you as you are today. What would she think?
 Put yourself in her place. You have a power she lacks. You can kill a hornbuck from a great distance.
 She has never seen a bow -- it doesn't yet exist in her world. To you, it's a simple tool. To her, it's magic.
 And how would she react to you?
 Just as you fear me.
 Good. My people once lived in caves, too. We learned to build huts... and, later, to build ships such as this one.
 Of that, I have absolutely no doubt.
 You are indeed a leader.
 That is beyond my power.
 (almost to himself) I've failed to get through to you, haven't I? Despite all my efforts...
 On my way.
 No.
 No, we are not. (a beat) We can cure many diseases and repair many injuries. We can extend life... but despite all our knowledge -- all our advances -- we are just as mortal as you are... just as powerless to prevent the inevitable.
 Liko!
 No, Liko -- I am not the Overseer. I am a man... a traveller from a faraway land. Nothing more.
 You are no one's servant. I deserve neither your obedience nor your worship.
 I can't.
 I am not angry.
 It is beyond my power.
 Go ahead, Liko. If I am all-powerful, you can't hurt me. (a beat) If, however, I am telling the truth and I am mortal... you will kill me.
 But if the only proof you will believe is my life -- then shoot.
 Captain's log, supplemental. Before we dismantle the observation post and depart, I must make one last visit to Mintaka Three.
 Now, Mister La Forge.
 A place where we could watch your people.
 To study you. To understand your ways.
 Because we were once as you are. To study you is to understand ourselves.
 It is our highest law that we shall not interfere with other cultures.
 Yes. And now we must leave.
 (gently) But that would also be interfering. You must progress on your own.
 Not even the stars.
 Always.
 observing the play of information across one of the monitors. WESLEY is at the Conn, DATA is at Ops and TROI is in the command area, while SEVERAL N.D. / CREWMEMBERS are at duty stations or passing through the Bridge.
 What do we know about them, Data?
 Destroyed themselves, Data?
 Transporter Room!
 Beam them straight to Sickbay. Doctor Crusher, incoming wounded.
 Captain's Log: Stardate 43506.5 The Enterprise remains in standard orbit while we investigate the tragedy which has struck the Away Team.
 (continuing) Lieutenant Marla Aster, ship's archaeologist has been killed in what should have been a routine mission. Whatever the explanation, it will not bring back a valued and trusted officer.
 Lieutenant. I have the utmost faith that you acted properly and in the best traditions of Starfleet.
 What about his father?
 Where is the boy now?
 I appreciate the offer but this is my responsibility.
 Picard to Bridge.
 Assign Commander La Forge to lead another Away Team to the digsite. I want to know why this happened...
 I will be with Counselor Troi and young Jeremy Aster.
 I really wonder...
 (to computer) Halt.
 I've always believed that carrying children on a starship... it's a questionable policy.
 (continuing) Serving on a starship means accepting certain risks and dangers. But did Jeremy Aster make that choice?
 No, but Earth is not likely to be ordered to the Neutral Zone to repel a Romulan attack... (beat, softer) It was my command which sent his mother to her death. She understood her mission and my duty. Will he?
 (to computer) Resume.
 Jeremy, it is my sad duty to tell you that your mother has died.
 An explosive device at the mission site. She died instantly.
 I've been told... you've also lost your father.
 (softly) No one is alone on the starship Enterprise, Jeremy. No one.
 How long would you say they've been there, Data?
 Left by whom? There are no indications of life on this planet.
 Come.
 Counselor. How is the boy?
 Good.
 How can we help?
 Oh?
 I know it. (thoughtful) Perhaps it would be a comfort to both your patients, Counselor.
 As you always do.
 (continuing) I break the unpleasant news and my responsibility ends. You have to stay with them through the entire grieving process.
 Location?
 Indeed. (to Data) Full scan.
 A life form?
 Data, scan analysis on Main Viewer...
 Is it alive?
 An alien presence... ?
 Go ahead.
 Do not provoke her or interfere in any way until I arrive. Picard out. (to Riker) Have security moving that way but tell them to keep their distance. You have the Bridge. Counselor...
 We're on our way.
 Who are you?
 (to Marla) What do you want?
 I cannot permit that. This child is my responsibility.
 Because I don't know who -- or what -- you are.
 Jeremy, she appears to be your mother, but she is not.
 Is the boy in any danger?
 Help him?
 Troi, would it be wise to remove Jeremy from his quarters?
 Remain in the cabin with them, Counselor. We're going to try to put an end to this from here...
 Mister Data, can we determine for certain the energy source from the planet is powering this creation?
 So there are limits to her power...
 So how do we cut the puppet's strings?
 Proceed.
 Mister Crusher, take us out of...
 Lieutenant Worf, Commander La Forge with me... Number One you have the Bridge.
 (keys insignia) Acknowledged.
 Lieutenant Worf, to Transporter Room Three.
 (keys insignia) Bridge, seal off deck eight, corridors A and B.
 Bridge, release security forcefield eight - B.
 How are you, Jeremy? Are you frightened?
 Of course. These are frightening things that are happening. We won't let anyone harm you. (off-handedly) Counselor, why don't you take the child to my quarters.
 We? For whom else do you speak?
 I appreciate your motives. But his mother is dead. He must learn to live with that.
 But not his mother.
 Picard to Lieutenant Worf.
 Please escort Ensign Crusher to the Aster quarters. Picard out.
 It is at the heart of our very nature... to feel pain... and joy... that is what makes us what we are.
 For a brief moment in time... he surely would be. Any of us in his place would be.
 Yes, it is quite an undertaking you're proposing, isn't it?
 Do you honestly believe he will be happy in this total fiction you wish to create?
 What will be his reason to live?
 What you offer is a memory... to cherish... but not to live in. (beat) It is part of our life cycle to accept the death of those we love. He must deal with grief, not cover it or hide from it. We are mortal. Our time in this universe is finite. It is the lesson every human must learn.
 Come in, Wesley.
 ... No, stay, Lieutenant.
 Wesley lost his father on a Starfleet mission when he was even younger than you are.
 The day I told you your father had been killed.
 As I recall, you handled the news very well.
 (probing) So you were prepared.
 Are you saying you didn't want anybody to see how you really felt, Wesley?
 So how did you really feel?
 (gently) Somebody?
 Why, Wesley? Why were you angry with me?
 Were you angry because I was the one who told you he was dead?
 Then why?
 Lieutenant Worf also lost his parents, Jeremy.
 Data ENTERS. Riker fills them in...
 Not at all possible. Lay in a course to the source of the signal.
 Put it on the viewer, Mister Data.
 (enthusiastic) And with its Lang Cycle fusion engines intact.
 I should hope not. That ship belongs in a museum. (moving closer) Gentlemen, I'm afraid we're a little late. This call for help was very likely initiated over a thousand years ago.
 Captain's log, Stardate 43799.1. We have arrived at Orelious Nine, to chart the battle in which the Menthars and Promellians fought to their mutual extinction. Among the ruins we have found a relic: a Promellian battle cruiser that has withstood the centuries.
 Indulge me, Number One...
 (frowns) No. Captain's prerogative, here. This one's mine. We've examined every conceivable risk...
 Ghosts, perhaps? (beat) Haven't you ever dreamed of climbing inside the bottle... ?
 The ship in the bottle, Number One. Model air ships... I used to build them as a child. By God, I'll bet I even had a Promellian battle cruiser too.
 Ready to beam the away team to the vessel...
 It is exactly as they left it, Number One. In the bottle. (off their looks) Good Lord, didn't anyone else here build ships in bottles when they were boys?
 (to a compatriot) Thank you, Mister O'Brien. Proceed.
 Extraordinary. You would expect the layout of a bridge from this era to be clumsy, awkward... but see this -- it is a model of simplicity. They built the same craft for generations. And it worked.
 Mister Worf, be sure we get tricorder images of their tactical display...
 Look here, Worf... how well laid out it is. We went through how many different designs before we reached this kind of sophistication... ?
 As well they should have.
 Positron ducts. These channeled power from one end of the ship to the other.
 Let's put an end to their last cry for help.
 Crude by our standards today, Data. When this ship was built, humans on Earth had just perfected the mechanical clock... and were using steel crossbows in battle. (examining it) Is there any way to see what's on this?
 Indeed, sir. (keys insignia) Picard to Enterprise.
 I think we've seen just about all there is to see here. At Mister O'Brien's convenience... we are ready to return...
 You were absolutely right, Number One. There were ghosts aboard the old ship after all... one of them even spoke to us.
 My own counterpart. The ship captain's final message... praising his crew.
 Data, advise the Astral-Five annex of the Smithsonian... This should be catalogued and scheduled for retrieval...
 (gruff) Mister Crusher, set our course for the original coordinates.
 Yellow Alert.
 Mister Crusher, reverse course. Full impulse power.
 Increase speed to warp one.
 Red Alert.
 Is it possible... have we stumbled into the same snare that killed them? A thousand-year-old... booby trap?
 Have you identified the source of the radiation, Mister Worf?
 And no apparent explanation for the loss of energy... ?
 Agreed. Worf, what would be the impact of lowering shields long enough to get an away team out... ?
 That's your job, Commander La Forge. Determine a way to keep the Enterprise up and running. Data, you will join Commander Riker on the away team. Find out what happened to that ship.
 Proceed.
 (to Beverly) After the shields fall, how long for a fatal exposure?
 Their captain's log, perhaps?
 Data, are the coils in working condition?
 Good. Return at once.
 Go ahead.
 Well done, Mister La Forge.
 Pass on my congratulations to your team, Commander.
 Picard out.
 (to Riker) He must have logged the cause of his ship's death. What captain wouldn't?
 Aceton assimilators -- ?
 And now we're supplying the devices with the energy to kill us.
 How many of these devices do we think we're dealing with?
 Is there any indication of a weakness in a specific part of the field...
 Of any kind.
 I'll take that point-one percent.
 How critical would the losses be?
 Mister La Forge, alternative suggestions?
 I imagine a discussion very much like this took place on our neighbor's ship a thousand years ago. May our decisions meet with more success than theirs. (decides) Mister La Forge, you will return to Engineering and continue your efforts without delay. Mister Worf, prepare the phasers.
 Damn you.
 How long do we have shields based on current calculations... ?
 (to Beverly) Impact on fatal exposure?
 Mister La Forge, have we shut down all non-essential energy usage?
 For what purpose?
 Computer, reinstate Holodeck Three program.
 Your best suggestion in an hour, Mister La Forge. Picard out.
 The bottom line, Commander.
 What kind of chance?
 Proceed.
 This is the only way...
 Come.
 He's come up with something that might give us a chance. If we agree to stay out of it.
 He proposes to turn control of the ship over to the computer because it is capable of making quicker adjustments than any human being.
 Especially with a thousand lives at stake. (frowns) What choice do I have? (MORE)
 (beat) You missed something by not playing with model ships. They were the source of one boy's imaginary voyages, each holding a treasure of adventures. Manning the earliest space craft. Or flying a plane with only one propeller to keep you in the sky. Imagine that. (beat) Now, the machines are flying us.
 Picard to La Forge.
 Two minutes. Picard out.
 Didn't your research suggest thousands of adjustments would be required per second?
 Have you analyzed the risk factor?
 Make it ready.
 No, Mister La Forge. You've done your job. Now I must do mine.
 I relieve you, Mister Crusher.
 Firing impulse engines.
 Thank you, Mister Data.
 Mister Crusher, the conn is yours.
 Initiate full restart. Bring all systems back on-line.
 Number One... make sure the booby trap won't bother anyone again.
 Captain's log, Stardate 43349.2. An unidentified distress signal has led to the discovery of a crashed Romulan vessel on the surface of Galorndon Core, a Federation planet.
 (continuing) We have recovered one survivor. Lieutenant Commander La Forge did not report back with the away team and is still missing on the surface.
 Denied. (off his look) When we get another window in the storms.
 The crash site?
 No sign of others...
 It certainly is the last place one would expect a Romulan encroachment. (speculating) On the other hand, Galorndon Core would provide ideal cover for an opening move of a new offensive.
 Can you treat him?
 It is an important consideration, Doctor.
 Nor would we ask you to.
 The only answer he offers is that he was alone...
 (nods to Wesley) Make it so.
 From the planet?
 On screen.
 Mister Worf, hail the Romulan vessel.
 Romulan vessel. This is Captain Jean-Luc Picard of the Federation Starship Enterprise.
 Commander Tomalak, we have intercepted your transmission. You are not to enter Federation space.
 (dry) Really...
 A "slight" navigational error. Nearly half a light year past the Neutral Zone.
 Commander, we have recovered one of your survivors.
 We are treating him for severe injuries.
 (pointed) Destroyed... deliberately... after the crash.
 For all Romulan crews in enemy space... which would suggest they knew where they were, Commander.
 He is not conscious... and not well enough to leave Sickbay.
 I have an away team on the surface. We are waiting for a window in the storm to beam them back.
 Are there any other Romulans we should be looking to recover from Galorndon Core... ?
 Counselor?
 Without clear evidence of intent, it would not be a simple matter.
 (acknowledges) We must measure the response carefully, Number One. Or history may remember Galorndon Core alongside Pearl Harbor and Station Salem-One... as the stage for a bloody preamble to war.
 Go ahead.
 You haven't found a compatible ribosome donor?
 Keep me advised. Picard out.
 Well done, Ensign. (to Worf) Launch the probe.
 There is no alternative?
 We need him alive... (beat) It is easy to forget that our Lieutenant Worf is not human. His values are very different from yours and mine.
 ... this is a personal matter...
 (you mean) Order him.
 (uncomfortable) A captain's encouragement is difficult to refuse, Doctor. (beat) And difficult to offer to a man whose feelings run so deep.
 I must respect his personal views... even if I do not share them. He will have to live with the consequences of his decision.
 Close enough, however, to see we're not there. (to Worf) On screen.
 My away team has not been able to leave the surface because of the storms.
 He is alive.
 Yes.
 If the point hasn't been made clearly, Commander, let me make it again. (MORE)
 Romulan warships do not enter Federation space unless they are prepared to do battle.
 A mission to recover one of your officers who was caught on a Federation planet. For reasons still unknown...
 And I have rejected your explanation.
 Commander, your singular concern for a life is impressive. Do not risk any more lives by leaving the Neutral Zone. Picard out.
 (to Riker) Assemble an away team...
 Stand by, Number One. (quietly) Red Alert.
 Yes, Lieutenant. (a beat) I assume you know what this is about...
 The Romulan ship will reach us within the hour, Lieutenant. If our patient dies... it may be just the excuse the Romulan commander needs to start an incident. The death of a Romulan officer at the hands of the Federation! Think of it.
 (acknowledges) There is no question that this Romulan is more valuable to us alive than dead, Lieutenant.
 Sometimes the moral obligations of command are less than clear. I weigh the good of the many against the needs of the individual... and try to balance them as realistically as possible. God knows I don't always succeed.
 (with appreciation) You wouldn't complain even if you had cause, Lieutenant.
 I cannot order you. I will not order you, Lieutenant. But I ask you. I beg you to volunteer.
 Lieutenant...
 Dismissed.
 (keys insignia) Picard to Doctor Crusher.
 Do not continue to enlist Lieutenant Worf's assistance.
 Estimated duration?
 On screen.
 On screen.
 (equally hard) You have entered Federation space despite my warning, Commander.
 He is dead.
 All shields to maximum.
 Lock phasers on target.
 Transporter Room. Lock onto the coordinates of the neutrino beacon and stand by.
 (mind racing) But it is a likely hypothesis, Number One. If Mister La Forge located a second survivor... (to Worf) Hail the Romulan ship, Lieutenant.
 Repeat the hail -- all channels. (to Riker) He has no way of knowing how accurate our sensors are... put on your poker face, Number One... (to Worf) Open frequency.
 Commander Tomalak. It would appear our away team has rescued a second man from your one man ship.
 They are on the surface, ready to beam up. We are preparing to do so. (beat, a decision) After which we will return the survivor to you.
 Commander, both our ships are ready to fight. We have two supremely powerful, destructive arsenals at our command. Our next actions will have serious repercussions for both sides. (a beat) We have good reason to mistrust one another, Commander, but we have better reasons to set our differences aside. The question, of course, is who will show vulnerability first. (a beat) The answer is -- I will. I must lower my shields to transport these men off the planet surface.
 Once the shields are down, you will have an opportunity to open fire. If you do, you will not only destroy the Enterprise and its crew -- but also the cease-fire that the Romulans and the Federation now enjoy.
 Lieutenant, lower the shields. Leave hailing frequencies open.
 Mister O'Brien. Transport Mister La Forge and the Romulan directly to the bridge.
 Belay that order, Lieutenant. Shields up. (to Bochra) No one is going to harm you.
 Well, Commander?
 Commander, how is it possible you didn't know of this second Romulan on Galorndon Core?
 Of course not.
 Let's just say my faith would be strengthened with a gesture -- such as powering down your disruptors.
 Thank you. Cancel Red Alert, Lieutenant.
 (continuing) We will return your officer and escort your ship back to the Neutral Zone, Commander.
 Mister La Forge, it's good to have you back.
 Mister La Forge, Mister Worf -- escort our guest to Transporter Room One.
 Too close, Number One. Brinksmanship is a dangerous game...
 Picard to Counselor Troi.
 The pleasure of your company is requested, Counselor. We're having an impromptu reception for the arriving delegates.
 Oh, just throw on any old thing. We're about to get our first look at the wormhole.
 Ah, Counselor Troi... allow me to do the introductions... Premier Bhavani of the Barzan...
 You know Mister Mendoza, the Federation negotiator...
 One of the Federation's worthy competitors in the bidding, Leyor of the Caldonians.
 Indeed. It will be visible directly ahead...
 Captain's log, Stardate 43385.7. We are in orbit around Barzan, a planet which is entertaining bids for control of what appears to be a most unique, stable wormhole. It could conceivably provide a permanent shortcut within our galaxy.
 You were not expecting the Ferengi, Premier... ?
 (keys insignia) Chief O'Brien, this is Picard. Beam the Ferengi directly to the observation lounge.
 DaiMon, I am Captain Jean-Luc Picard of the Enterprise... I'm serving as host for these proceedings...
 (with an edge) Perhaps you misunderstood...
 DaiMon, due to the intimate nature of these negotiations, all parties agreed that one representative would suffice. I will be happy to provide your consuls with accommodations... and you may have my chair...
 It would take us nearly a century at warp nine to cross that distance...
 Commander Riker teaches poker.
 Mister Mendoza, if this lives up to its billing... it is a discovery of extraordinary value... but it is a big "if"...
 The Federation could wind up "buying" itself the proverbial lemon, Mister Mendoza.
 (acknowledges) Before anyone goes in there, we're going to conduct a full sensor analysis. I want to do everything possible to determine that it's safe. (beat) If we're satisfied, Data, you and Commander La Forge will enter the wormhole tommorrow.
 Premier Bhavani has no objection...
 We will gladly share the results of our exploration with all the delegates...
 Tell Data and La Forge to do themselves a favor and stay out of their way.
 (keys insignia) Acknowledged, Doctor.
 (a beat) Keep us advised.
 The Federation's top negotiator taken out by a mysterious ailment. Suspicions?
 Well, I guess you'll have to fill in for him, Number One.
 I am the designated host. It would be a most awkward transition. The next likely choice is you. Mister Mendoza would agree. He was quite impressed with your natural instincts.
 Yes, the stakes are higher. But then... that's when the game gets interesting, doesn't it, Commander.
 Shuttle nine, stand by...
 Proceed when ready.
 Pipe it in, Lieutenant.
 Make it so.
 (to com) Computer, is the Ferengi Goss still aboard the Enterprise?
 Yellow Alert. Hail the Ferengi.
 On screen.
 Request an explanation for your actions, DaiMon Goss.
 That is not true...
 Premier Bhavani welcomed you to these proceedings, Goss... despite my better judgment...
 Destroy it.
 Goss has fired a missile at the wormhole... I need you on the bridge, Number One...
 (to viewscreen) You must know we will not allow you to do this, Goss.
 Can he possibly believe that a missile will have any destructive effect on a wormhole?
 (off her look) Viewscreen off.
 Premier, with all due respect...
 Stand down, Red Alert.
 (enough already) Off screen.
 (knows by the sound in his voice) On speaker.
 Shuttle, this is Picard... do you read... (no response) On screen...
 The Ferengi pod?
 Elaborate.
 Acknowledged, Shuttle nine. Main Shuttlebay, prepare for final approach.
 Advise him to set his coordinates for the Delta Quadrant, Lieutenant... He might run into them in eighty years or so.
 Several... when one would surely have sufficed.
 Acamarians. (a beat) That would suggest... the Gatherers.
 And we cannot permit them to spread their violent ways further. (keys insignia) Mister Crusher, set course for the Acamar system.
 Captain's log, Stardate 43562.9. In an effort to put an end to the Gatherer raids, we have come to the Acamar System to enlist the aid of Marouk, the sovereign of Acamar Three.
 Their raids have made this sector unsafe. Our research facilities have been ransacked; trade routes disrupted...
 Hunting them down is not what I'm proposing.
 (surprised) Eighteen years?
 They are still your people.
 Despite all your progress, your society is still divided. And it will remain so until the Gatherers return to Acamar.
 You have much to gain and little to lose in making the effort. The problem affects us all... it cannot be ignored.
 Sovereign Marouk, how soon will you be ready to leave Acamar?
 Mister Data?
 Mister Crusher, set course for the Hromi Cluster.
 Make it so.
 Sovereign...
 Brull...
 Sit down.
 We are here to talk.
 She is here, isn't she, Brull?
 (trying to pin him down) But you agree it's worth presenting to your leader.
 Brull, in twenty days, I hope to be... very far away from here.
 We will gladly take you with us aboard the Enterprise. It will give you a chance to enjoy Federation hospitality. How many of your men do you want to accompany you?
 Is there anything you need to bring with you, Brull?
 Anything... a change of clothes, perhaps...
 Very well then... (keys insignia) Picard to Enterprise... two...
 (acknowledges, naturally) Two to beam up...
 Brull -- show Mister Crusher the course to plot.
 (pointedly) That "child" is one of the finest ensigns under my command. He also happens to pilot this ship.
 And these blood feuds could last for decades?
 It's not unlike the history of my own planet, Marouk.
 Your people have provided a warm welcome.
 (indicating Worf's station) Worf -- contact Chorgan and tell him Brull has brought us here to talk.
 Mister Worf, can we knock out their shields without seriously damaging their ship?
 Prepare phasers and open channel...
 This is Jean-Luc Picard...
 (to himself) Let's focus their attention. (to Worf) Fire.
 Well done, Lieutenant.
 That's better. (to Worf) On screen.
 Chorgan, if I had wanted you destroyed, you wouldn't be talking now.
 Obviously, I want something else.
 I have on board Sovereign Marouk of Acamar Three. I want you to hear what she and Brull have to say.
 (with finality) You have no choice. Prepare to receive us -- we're coming aboard your ship. Picard out.
 Cancel Red Alert. Have Sovereign Marouk meet me in Transporter Three.
 The danger is minimal, Number One. Chorgan's not likely to do anything rash while the Enterprise's phasers are trained upon his ship.
 For these negotiations to succeed, I must be a mediator -- not an enforcer.
 You have the bridge, Number One.
 Chorgan. May I introduce Sovereign Marouk.
 (to Chorgan) I think you will find Marouk's proposal --
 Then let's proceed.
 She's trying to put an end to that.
 Let us acknowledge, Sovereign, that Chorgan appears willing to discuss your offer...
 Sovereign -- were the situation reversed, you would be demanding the same levels of representation.
 Perhaps a short pause would be helpful.
 It's quite remarkable how much alike the two of you actually are...
 I'm being quite honest... both able negotiators... strong leaders.
 Wrong, Chorgan... we've agreed to have some brandy together.
 Chorgan, I assure you Commander Riker has a good reason for his actions... (beat) ... you do, Number One?
 New orders from Starfleet.
 The rendezvous with the Goddard has been postponed.
 Starbase three four three. We're to take on medical supplies for the Alpha Leonis system.
 With the Gatherer truce in effect, it should be. (a beat) We won't require a full ship's complement. I'm going to extend shore leave on the starbase to anyone who wants it.
 Delightful... you're getting better and better, Data...
 (frowns) Data, you are here to learn about the human condition... and there's no better way than embracing Shakespeare... but you must discover it through your own performance, not by imitating...
 Yes, Number One.
 On our way... Picard out. We'll get to the next act later, Data... computer, end program.
 But listen to what Shakespeare is telling you about the man, Data... a king who has a true feeling for his soldiers must share their fears on the day of battle.
 Let's... not rush it, shall we... ?
 A scout ship? Curious. What would bring a scout ship into the Neutral Zone?
 Open hailing frequencies.
 Visual... ?
 Open channel...
 This is Captain Jean-Luc Picard of the...
 Red Alert. Open a channel to the warship.
 Romulan warbird, you have crossed into the Neutral Zone, and are engaged in hostile action. Explain yourself and your intent.
 Hail the scout.
 On screen.
 We are moving to intercept... maintain your course and power...
 Bring us to within five kilometers of the scout. Mister La Forge, prepare to extend our shields around that ship.
 Extend shields.
 Open a channel.
 Romulan warbird, you are now in Federation territory... if you do not immediately withdraw...
 (to Com) Transporter Room Two, prepare to beam the occupant of the Romulan ship aboard.
 Data, lock onto the scout ship and take it in tow... cancel Red Alert.
 Captain's log, Stardate 43462.5. We have beamed aboard an apparent Romulan defector. He claims to be a low ranking logistics officer with extraordinary information about a new secret offensive.
 I'm sure you're tired from your ordeal... and could use some medical attention. Mister Worf, accompany Sublieutenant Setal to sickbay. We'll arrange for your quarters.
 No doubt.
 You don't believe it...
 ... and the Romulans would have a legitimate excuse to respond with force.
 (thoughtful) It is always a chess game with them, isn't it?
 (acknowledges) Mister La Forge, you will head the away team over to the scout. (to Riker) Commander, you and Counselor Troi will conduct Setal's interrogation.
 No, I need you with me on the bridge, Data... there's much to be done. (beat) We have less than forty-eight hours to prevent a war... or perhaps start one. That depends on establishing the truth of...
 Isolate and magnify the Nelvana star system.
 It is hard to believe what we cannot see, Data. And yet, with their cloaking technology, a fleet of Romulan warships could conceivably be passing right before our eyes. (thoughtfully) There must be a way we can neutralize that advantage...
 In my Ready Room. Delay time, computer... ?
 Computer, key access four-one-two mark eight-zero. Picard. Jean- Luc. Starfleet priority code Gamma. Decode.
 Begin message.
 Picard to Lieutenant Worf. Please come to my Ready Room.
 Doctor, is there any possibility his wound was self-inflicted?
 A possibility...
 Captain's log, Stardate 43463.7. We are holding a position at the Neutral Zone border proximate to Nelvana Three.
 There are twenty one hours left before the Romulan base becomes functional, if our guest is telling the truth. Counselor Troi, however, feels Sublieutenant Setal is being deliberately deceptive.
 Come.
 Data, prepare a class one probe. Set sensors for maximum scan. I want every meter of Nelvana Three monitored.
 One moment.
 (continuing) Sit down.
 Yes. Your clarity of thought, your objectivity... as always... (a beat) We're very possibly about to go to war, Data. The repercussions of what we do during the next twenty-four hours may be felt for years to come. I'd like you to keep the official record of these events, so we may give history the benefit of a dispassionate view.
 How are the crew's spirits?
 Unlike King Henry, it's not so easy for me to disguise myself and walk among my troops. (beat) That's all, Data.
 "Now if these men do not die well, it will be a black matter for the King that led them to it."
 Lieutenant Worf, handle this at security station, deck nine...
 Proceed.
 Coordinate your analysis with Mister La Forge... I want your report with dispatch...
 Could they be naturally occuring?
 Can we decode it?
 What about the planet surface?
 (acknowledges) That will be all, gentlemen.
 Show him in.
 Wait outside, Ensign. Have a seat... Admiral Jarok.
 (casual, you do not give orders here) Have a seat, Admiral.
 I am not convinced you are telling the truth.
 (shrugs) You must convince me.
 If I had irrefutable evidence... (beat) ... but you did not bring irrefutable evidence. You brought no evidence at all. In fact, this entire escape stretched your credibility beyond belief. Now we hear that you are not even who you claimed to be. (beat) A Romulan defector is virtually a contradiction in terms. But Admiral Jarok crossing the lines...
 Yes, peace in our galaxy. (beat) Except you are not a man of peace, Admiral. Your military record, what we know of it, is clear...
 (overlapping) ... the massacre at the Norkan Outposts, for example...
 On what basis shall I decide, Admiral? Your good word? Are you willing to reveal ways to overpower the Romulan B-type warbirds we may encounter? Are you prepared to help us detect them through their cloaking shields?
 You see my problem, Admiral. You ask us for faith in circumstances not only difficult to believe but compounded by your own lies, and your own reluctance to tell us all you know...
 You have already betrayed your people. You have made your choices. You are a traitor, sir. If the bitter taste of it disagrees with you, I am truly sorry. But I will not risk the lives of my crew because you think you can dance on the edge of the Neutral Zone. You have crossed over, Admiral. I suggest you make yourself comfortable.
 No.
 (no interest in this) Yes, this is all very interesting, but...
 (softly, the obvious) I cannot. And will not. Unless I have your unequivocal assistance.
 Admiral Jarok has provided me with the strength, location and tactical plans for the Romulan fleet. (reactions) Mister La Forge, he is prepared to give you data regarding engines, weapons and cloaking systems on the warbird class starship. But I believe we'll find his experience as a field commander more valuable in a strategic sense than in the technical areas.
 Don't depend on it. For all we know, he may still be lying. (beat) We'll find out soon enough. Number One, set a course for Nelvana Three.
 Engage.
 Number One, you echo another noteworthy commander in a similar circumstance. One of your countrymen... (off his look) George Armstrong Custer when his Seventh Cavalry arrived at the Little Big Horn.
 Prepare to enter standard orbit.
 Data?
 The subspace signal the probe detected? The ionization disturbances?
 (to Worf) Have Jarok brought to the bridge.
 Perhaps you'd like to tell us why we're here, Admiral.
 Nelvana Three, Admiral... no base, no weapons, no sign of life at all.
 Could they have been feeding you disinformation?
 (continuing) You said you had been censored. Reassigned four months ago. They knew of your dissatisfaction... could this have been a test of your loyalty?
 They let you escape with an arsenal of worthless secrets... what other explanation is there?
 Proceed.
 Not yet, Mister Worf. (beat) This is just a tap on the shoulder. Or we wouldn't be here talking about it.
 On screen...
 Commander Tomalak, as I suspect you already know, we have responded to a warning of a Romulan incursion on Nelvana Three...
 There is the matter of an unidentified subspace radio emission... and ionization distubrances...
 With a cloaked satellite...
 Believe whatever you wish, Tomalak. We will be on our way.
 If an apology will do, I will offer it.
 Get to it, Tomalak.
 Do you seriously expect me to agree to those terms?
 I do not require one second.
 If the cause is just and honorable, they are prepared to give their lives. Are you prepared to die today, Tomalak?
 And so you shall have it. Now, Mister Worf.
 What shall it be, Tomalak?
 Nor will you survive ours, Commander. Shall we die together... ?
 Mister Worf, extend the appreciation of the Federation... and my personal gratitude... to the Klingons.
 Take us home, Number One.
 Today, perhaps... but if there are others as courageous as Admiral Jarok... there is hope for a day of peace when we can take his letter home.
 Captain's log, Stardate 43489.2. We have arrived at Angosia, a planet that is eager for membership in the Federation.
 in the rotunda of the senate building. The Angosians take their civic duty very seriously and the senate is considered a repository of wisdom and law. Various government officials and petitioners pass by, either in deep discussion or thoughtful meditation.
 I'm greatly impressed with what I've seen so far, Prime Minister.
 An unfortunate reality.
 I think they'll make a fine addition to the Federation, Number One...
 (settling into the Command Chair) On screen.
 We appreciate the warning, Prime Minister. We will keep you posted on our progress.
 A cloaking device?
 We'll have our answer shortly. Lock on tractor beam, Mister La Forge.
 On Main Viewer, Mister Worf.
 Ensign Crusher, fix coordinates of that vessel. We'll transport the whole thing to a shuttlebay if we have to.
 Transporter Room Four, prepare to beam aboard anything that's large enough to be a humanoid adult from inside that pod.
 We will await your signal.
 He's in our highest security detention area... there shouldn't be any more problems...
 Can he be some sort of android?
 (sensing a problem) Counselor...
 Counselor, it took five men to restrain him... and he took apart half of the Transporter Room in the process.
 Your dedication to helping others in pain is admirable, Counselor. But in a few hours, I will turn him over to the Angosians... and be glad to do so.
 Why was this man assigned to the Lunar Five facility?
 Then, perhaps you'd clarify it for me...
 Their Gulag...
 Was it a forced "resettlement"?
 Even the most comfortable prison is a prison, Prime Minister.
 Prime Minister, my medical team has suggested there may be treatment alternatives...
 Mister Danar, I am going to transfer you back to Angosian security. They are en route and will arrive shortly. I came to tell you that I have no choice. The prime minister has insisted and we have no right to refuse.
 I respect my officers' judgement, Danar. I wish I could help further. If a way appears to me, I will.
 I felt you deserved that much.
 Inform them the transfer will take place shortly. Picard out. Mister Data, to the bridge please...
 (to Wagnor) Stand by for transport. Picard out.
 (continuing) Mister Worf, have all security precautions been taken?
 (acknowledges) Proceed.
 (to Data) Sound general quarters. Clear corridors of all non-essential personnel. I don't want him taking any hostages.
 Raise security containment fields immediately on decks thirty-four, thirty-five, and thirty-six.
 Data -- override its destination and divert that turbolift to a position near Lieutenant Worf's current location.
 He's headed for Engineering.
 Data -- I want you to stall Danar. Allow him to think he's succeeding.
 Make it so.
 Very good, Mister Data. And now we know where he's headed.
 (to Comm) Security team to Jefferies tube J-four, deck fifteen.
 Explain.
 And you believe he's using the same tactic now.
 He doubled back on us.
 (to Data) Advise personnel on deck thirty-eight to stay out of all Cargo Bays.
 Good. I want you to flood them with Anastazine.
 Restore normal environmental conditions, Mister Data.
 Move in security teams, Mister Worf.
 A pressure suit...
 Mister Worf --
 Post security guards at all emergency airlocks on decks thirty-seven through thirty-nine...
 Data, can you verify that?
 Then we have no way to track him.
 Sweep the area, Mister Worf...
 On screen.
 Yes, Prime Minister.
 Attacked it... ?
 We'll send an away team, Prime Minister... Picard out.
 Counselor Troi, Mister Data, Lieutenant Worf... you will accompany me to the planet...
 My understanding is that these men were programmed to survive, is that correct?
 And they will not kill unless their survival is at stake?
 (dry) Then let us hope they do not believe their survival is at stake.
 We're not here to fight your wars, Prime Minister...
 You are dangerous. They are only victims. (reactions) You made them what they are. You asked them to defend your way of life... then you discarded them.
 They are your sons, your brothers. And you have turned your backs on them.
 Unless you are prepared to die, I'd suggest you put that down.
 Danar, it appears to me that you are deliberately attempting to provoke a response... so you may justify your own attack on men who do not wish to fight...
 Yes... (beat) But you are not programmed to murder cowards... and if they will not fight back, what will you do?
 You're quite right, Prime Minister. (keys insignia) Enterprise, prepare to beam the away team back.
 We have everything we need for our report. Your prisoner has been returned to you. You have a decision to make... either try to force them back or welcome them home. In your own words, this is not our affair. We cannot interfere with the natural course of your society's development and I'd say it's likely to develop significantly during the next several minutes. (beat) It's been an interesting stay. When you are ready for membership in the Federation, we will be pleased to reconsider your application.
 Four to beam up, Mister Riker.
 Number One, note in your report that if the government of Angosia survives the night, we will offer Federation assistance in the efforts to reprogram their veterans.
 I have a feeling they will choose to.
 Mister Crusher, set coordinates for the starbase at Lya Three.
 Engage.
 Captain's log, Stardate 43510.7. The Enterprise has put in at Rutia Four to deliver medical supplies following an outbreak of violent protests.
 Although non-aligned, the planet has enjoyed a long trading relationship with the Federation.
 Your security status?
 Transporter Room Three, lock onto the away team, prepare to beam them back...
 (frowns, interrupting) Yes, I understand. Picard to Doctor Crusher...
 I've been advised of your situation by Mister Data.
 (annoyed) Doctor, will you at least allow me to...
 You are endangering yourself and the away team...
 Transporter Room, do you have lock on the away team?
 (a beat) Picard to Data. Hold your position until the Rutian medics arrive.
 Why... her?
 In fact, it's more likely that they will take good care of her... if they want to use her as a bargaining chip.
 The Ansata separatists have been trying for generations to be freed from the rule of the Eastern Continent. If they can get the government to even acknowledge their demands, then kidnapping your mother will have served a purpose.
 (continuing) That may be what they are after. It may not. Frankly, I don't care. All I care about is getting her back, Wesley... In a few minutes, we're leaving to meet with the authorities...
 No. You have an important job to do here. If we are to find your mother, we must have a way to trace the movements of these terrorists. I want you on the team that will investigate this new technology of theirs.
 Report to Mister Data. Dismissed.
 (beat) History has shown us that strength may be useless in the face of terrorism, Counselor.
 What exactly is Ansata policy in regard to hostages?
 They could just as easily have shot her where she stood...
 I appreciate your help.
 That we cannot do for you.
 I would like to leave Commander Riker to assist in your search for Doctor Crusher.
 We may well be dealing with irrational people, Data. Is there a way to trace this... ?
 (adding it up) And it sounds as though they might require the services of... a doctor.
 Can you estimate the number of jumps it will take?
 And by my... "program" as well, Data.
 I have never subscribed to the theory that political power flows from the barrel of a gun, Data...
 Yes, I'm aware of them...
 Data, we cannot condone violence.
 These are questions that mankind has been struggling with since creation. I am afraid your confusion, Data... is only human.
 Red Alert. Sound general quarters.
 Seal off all decks... lock on transporters to intruder signals.
 Transporter room three, lock on the explosive device and energize.
 Begin emergency evacuation... prepare for saucer separation... Mister La Forge, can you remove the charge from the engine core...
 Commander La Forge. Report.
 Can you calibrate their destination?
 Worf went down... I don't know if he's alive or dead... there were other casualties...
 Yes...
 He took cover... I didn't see any more than that... (beat) Are you all right?
 Side effects of their transport?
 We're getting closer to tracing their movements... actually, it was Wesley who put us onto this dimensional jumping of theirs...
 He's been extraordinary throughout this. He'll make a fine officer, Beverly.
 (shakes his head) I could have had you beamed up.
 (reacts back) I would and I should have.
 If you won't follow orders...
 Doctor, I will be the judge of reason when it comes to my orders...
 Then the only way out is by transporter or the dimensional jump.
 They're mad.
 (concerned) Beverly, I don't have to warn you about the psychological impact of being a hostage...
 No, he's certainly not what I'd expect. Without cause or reason, his little band of outlaws has attacked my ship...
 Beverly, you are arguing for a man who may have murdered your son.
 You've made a grave miscalculation...
 You've assaulted a Federation starship, killed and wounded members of her crew, kidnapped two officers... do you not expect a response?
 You want Federation involvement?
 You accuse us of cowardice while you plant bombs in shadows...
 He has added a chair to the negotiating table.
 You understand I will not cooperate in any way...
 How dangerous would another ride through the inverter be to us?
 It is our obligation to think of escape...
 A fine reason to escape... (beat) Do you think you've gained his confidence?
 Indeed, you have... and a bit more... this might prove to be an advantage, Doctor...
 Have they found us... ?
 (a beat) Take us out of orbit, Mister Crusher.
 (continuing) At your convenience.
 Captain's log, Stardate 43539.1. We have moved into orbit around Bre'el Four to investigate a potentially catastrophic threat to the population from a descending asteroidal moon...
 Won't the moon disintegrate prior to impact?
 How long before impact...
 (keying insignia) Commander La Forge, is there any way the Enterprise might be able to coax this satellite back where it belongs... ?
 Make it so.
 (to Main Viewer) We'll keep you informed of our progress. Picard out.
 Reduce engines... tractor beam off...
 Q.
 Captain's log, supplemental. We are no closer to finding a solution to the deteriorating orbit of the Bre'el Four moon... but with the arrival of Q, we now have a good idea of the cause.
 Our options?
 Keep me advised.
 What kind of twisted pleasure does it give you to bring terror into their lives... ?
 The millions of people down there who are watching as their moon falls out of the sky...
 And punish us as well, it seems...
 Q, what is it you want...
 Return the moon to its orbit.
 Q, the liar. Q, the misanthrope.
 Fine. You wish to be treated as a human?
 Mister Worf, throw him in the brig.
 The question is -- what sort of jaded game is he playing this time?
 (thoughtful) Or he may have nothing to do with it at all.
 Oh, I agree that is highly unlikely. But we have to proceed with our current dilemma as though Q is powerless to prevent it, don't we?
 I don't see much choice. (speaking to com) Mister Worf, hail the Bre'el Four science station...
 I'm sorry to report that our first attempt to restore the moon to its proper orbit has failed.
 There is hope... but if you have an evacuation plan...
 (acknowledges) We will make another attempt shortly... Picard out.
 What the devil... ?
 By whom?
 Enough. I want to know exactly what is going on, Q...
 We have a moon that is inexplicably falling out of orbit... and now the ship has been probed with Berthold radiation...
 You fell asleep...
 One gets used to it...
 I am unwilling to play along, Q. If you must keep up the charade, you will do it alone...
 Q, we're dealing with millions of lives... if you have the power to...
 Mister Data, please report to Detention Cell Three. Computer, remove the forcefield. (to Q) If this is what I must do to save those lives, I will.
 (continuing) You will not be left alone for one moment while you are on this ship, Q. If you are human, which I seriously doubt, I suggest you work hard to earn our welcome.
 You are hereby assigned to Q for the remainder of his stay... escort him to Mister La Forge in Engineering...
 On screen.
 Mister Worf, attempt to make contact...
 Red alert.
 Captain's log, supplemental. We have sustained light damage from an attack by an alien species known as the Calamarain. They apparently have a grievance with Q... no doubt one of many lifeforms that do.
 What did you do to them to motivate such a vengeance?
 Of course. You knew this would happen, didn't you?
 But you have so many enemies, Q, of various shapes and sizes... certainly you must have been concerned that once you became mortal... some of them might try to look you up...
 With all your chatter about "friendship", the real reason you're here is for protection, isn't it?
 What you call weakness, some of us would call strength.
 Indeed. Human or not, I want no part of you. We will deposit you at the first starbase. Let them deal with you...
 As though you have the faintest notion about team-work or cooperation...
 Then I suggest you apply to Starfleet Academy...
 Mister La Forge, your status?
 Mister Data, escort Q to Engineering... (to Q) You will assist Mister La Forge.
 Mister Worf, hail the Bre'el Four science station.
 Your moon has begun moving toward its perigee, Doctor... we are prepared to make our attempt...
 I'll keep you advised, Doctor. Picard out.
 (knowing the risks) Proceed. (beat) Mister Worf, keep a close eye on Q's friends out there...
 Engineering, is that the forward limit?
 Do you recommend we proceed... ?
 (quietly seething) You exceed your own standards of selfish preoccupation. Have you no concern for the officer who very probably saved your life?
 Come...
 It will not serve you here.
 That is his special nature. He has learned the lessons of humanity well...
 I am not your father confessor. You will not receive absolution from me, Q. You have brought nothing but pain and suffering to my crew. And to this very moment, I am not entirely convinced that this is still not your latest attempt at a bad joke.
 On Main Viewer.
 Opening hailing frequency.
 Shuttle occupant. Identify yourself.
 Q? Return to the ship at once.
 There is no dignity in suicide...
 This goes against all my better judgment... (keys insignia) Transporter Room Three, lock on to Shuttle One... beam it back to it's bay.
 Well, it's a perfectly good shuttlecraft...
 (reacts) Well, I guess that's the end of Q.
 Q...
 I don't.
 All of it.
 Now, at the risk of being rude...
 On screen, Lieutenant.
 I'm sorry... ?
 (reacts) I didn't. Stand by, Bre'el Four...
 Mister Data, your analysis...
 Good. Ensign, set a course for Station Nigala-Four. (sitting) Perhaps there's a little humanity left in Q after all.
 (putting aside paintbrush) Good.
 (gestures) Please... and examine the work of the other students as well.
 How so?
 (strained) Thank you... Mister Data.
 No... thank you.
 Captain's log, Stardate 43610.4. After completing a delivery of dicosilium to the Tanuga Four research station, our away team is receiving an update from Doctor Nel Apgar on his efforts to create Krieger Waves, a potentially valuable new power source.
 Welcome back, Mister La Forge. Where's Commander Riker?
 Any problems... ?
 (urgently) Transporter Room! Is Commander Riker aboard?
 Captain's log, supplemental: Commander Riker has informed me that Doctor Apgar was the only one aboard the space station when it exploded. We remain in orbit investigating the accident...
 Why was there a power drain before transport?
 I want an answer to that question... I'm sure the Tanugans will too...
 Any indications of reactor core problems while you were on the station?
 Number One... ?
 (to Riker) Commander La Forge suggested this was not an entirely routine mission...
 Granted, Lieutenant, please escort our guest to the bridge. (beat) ...slowly.
 (to Riker) Perhaps you should tell me as much as possible prior to his arrival, Number One.
 Chief Investigator, welcome to the Enterprise. I'm Captain Picard... my first officer, Commander William Riker.
 (interrupting) Chief Investigator... we are more than willing to cooperate fully with you, but...
 (to Krag) Why don't we discuss this in private...
 You have the bridge, Number One.
 Just what is your evidence against my officer?
 Threats... ? I am aware of an altercation between the two of them...
 In our system of legal jurisprudence, a man is innocent until proved guilty.
 (interrupting) I'm aware of the Federation regulations, sir... and if you will check further, they say the captain will decide if extradition is warranted...
 I'm saying...
 (continuing) If I find that there is sufficient cause to warrant a trial, I will... release Commander Riker to your custody.
 That's irrelevant here...
 I will protect the rights of my officer...
 You have my word as an officer of Starfleet that I will not.
 Interrogate him here.
 Perhaps not. (keys insignia) Mister Data, please report to my Ready Room. (to Krag) In fact, I may be able to assist you in recreating the events.
 Commander Data, Chief Inspector Krag.
 Data, by taking testimony from both the away team and from witnesses provided by Investigator Krag, would it be possible to program the Holodeck to recreate what happened aboard the science station?
 Data, escort the chief inspector to Transporter Room Three.
 Mister La Forge, Ensign Crusher, we are going to recreate the research station on the Holodeck. I want you to work with Mister Data on the preparations. In addition, Mister La Forge, you and Commander Riker will give the computer detailed depositions on everything you heard and saw while aboard. Counselor, you will assist me during this inquiry.
 (quiet yet firm) My decision on extradition will be based upon the evidence presented in these re-creations.
 Under these circumstances, I believe it would be inappropriate, Number One.
 Is there anything you'd like to say before we begin, Number One?
 computer -- freeze program.
 Resume program.
 That is correct.
 Not to my knowledge.
 (holding up a hand) Mrs. Apgar, do you understand the purpose of this hearing?
 Would you like to make a statement before we begin?
 Freeze program...
 Commander Riker...
 We'll, uh... take a short recess.
 Do you have any theories?
 Take every precaution you can to protect the ship's vital areas... if you haven't identified the source before the time interval is up, we will leave orbit. If you perceive any further danger, advise me immediately.
 Deck eleven.
 (about to warn Riker) Number One...
 It hasn't come to that yet.
 If you could just keep your trousers buckled... things like this wouldn't happen to you...
 Number One, even I gave her a second glance.
 Did I ever tell you about the mayor's wife in Brussels...
 I did tell you...
 As would I, Number One. As would I.
 Will, giving you to them would be like handing over a part of myself.
 (to computer) Resume.
 (interrupting) Inspector, this is hearsay... She wasn't a witness to this incident...
 (beat, frowns) We will... watch this evidence. And I will weigh it accordingly.
 I don't see any alternative, do you?
 Of course he is. But as a Starfleet captain, I don't have the luxury of yielding to my personal feelings. (beat) The evidence certainly warrants a trial... I will have to allow extradition.
 Frankly... no.
 Acknowledged. (pausing, to Troi) Why don't you spend some time with Commander Riker...
 (nods) The interval between radiation bursts...
 But why would the generator be affecting the Enterprise this way... ?
 Chief Inspector, we've watched the events replayed over and over again... I've been impressed... and admittedly dismayed... by the body of evidence you've prepared against Commander Riker.
 But isn't it remarkable that with all the witnesses, all the different points of view of the events aboard the space station... that we've never seen what really happened at all?
 Allow me, with the help of Mister La Forge, to explain. computer, load Manua Program One, time code fourteen-four-one...
 Play program.
 Freeze.
 Mrs. Apgar, this was from your deposition. It would suggest that your husband had failed to create Krieger Waves...
 (acknowledges) He says here he needed more time... and he was upset by our early arrival. In fact, I maintain he already had made a breakthrough... and that he was lying to us...
 We recreated your science lab in every conceivable detail... from all technical sources available including Doctor Apgar's own personal records... There is a slight margin of error, but essentially whatever was in the original lab is here...
 Your field generator on the planet surface has been sending out harmless energy charges... and this facsimile has been converting them into Krieger Waves.
 And those waves have been randomly striking different areas of our ship as we orbit the planet and our angle to the generator changes.
 (nods, yes, good question) Computer, run Manua Program One, time code, fourteen three-eight.
 Freeze.
 (continuing) Run Riker Program Two, time code, sixteen-one-zero.
 Freeze.
 Nevertheless, it seems clear that your husband was motivated to earn the kind of rewards that would please you, Mrs. Apgar.
 When the away team arrived early he must have been worried that Starfleet was getting suspicious. He needed more time to finish his work. Apgar said that in all three versions. No doubt, he was afraid that Commander Riker might learn the truth and cut off his support prematurely. (MORE)
 Discovering Commander Riker with his wife did not improve matters. (dramatic pause) And, I submit, that he decided to murder Commander Riker.
 Is it? Computer, run Tayna Program Four, time code eighteen-one-four.
 Freeze.
 (nods) Tayna, what is it that he's doing here... ?
 Why would he do that?
 Or he might have already been thinking ahead to his next confrontation with Commander Riker... Computer, play Riker Program Four, time code twenty-four-one.
 Freeze.
 To Apgar, that must have seemed as though Commander Riker was confirming his worst fears. And I believe this is when Apgar decided finally to kill him.
 Nor should you, Mrs. Apgar. We have arranged a demonstration to illustrate. Mister La Forge, I believe it is almost time is it not?
 If we're correct, we'll know it instantly.
 Doctor Apgar killed himself... during his attempt to kill Commander Riker.
 Well, Number One... have we any "further business" in the Tanuga system?
 Then perhaps you'd be so good as to get this ship underway?
 Ops. Worf ENTERS and goes to Tactical.
 Analysis, Mister Data.
 Is it a wormhole?
 Mister Data?
 Can you identify the ship, Lieutenant? Is it an enemy vessel?
 Military log, Combat-date 43625.2. While investigating an unusual radiation anomaly reported by Starbase one oh five, the Enterprise has encountered what could almost be called a ghost from its own past... The Enterprise-C, the immediate predecessor of this battleship.
 Mister Data, is it possible... that it has... traveled through time?
 A rift?
 Belay that order, Doctor.
 That ship has traveled into its own future. We are dealing with variables that could alter the flow of our own history.
 Hailing frequency, Lieutenant. This is Captain Picard of... a Federation starship. Standby to receive emergency teams.
 (to Riker) We'll handle this one step at a time. Stabilize power systems and attend to their casualties. Avoid discussions of where and when they are.
 (grimly) Battle alert, Mister Crusher. Condition Yellow.
 On screen, Mister Data.
 Go ahead, Commander
 Survivors?
 Recommendation?
 Agreed. But we can't stay in this area too long. (makes decision) You have nine hours. If you can get her underway in that time, we'll escort her back to Starbase one oh five. If not, we'll evacuate the survivors and destroy the ship.
 Keep me posted, Picard out.
 Guinan... ?
 You must have some idea how things have changed...
 What things? What people?
 What's the matter with it?
 It's the same bridge, Guinan. It hasn't changed.
 What else?
 Children? On the Enterprise... ? (she nods) We're at war, Guinan.
 (beat) Guinan, what you're suggesting...
 (to Garrett) I'm Captain Picard.
 Life support systems have been restored. Repairs are continuing.
 (avoiding her question) What is the last thing you remember?
 Distress signal... ?
 You are aboard the Enterprise, Captain... one-seven-oh-one-D.
 You have come twenty-two years into the future.
 No.
 (reluctantly) If you wish, I will see to it that they're informed...
 I am concerned that if you return to your own time with knowledge of the future...
 Have you any idea how this happened?
 It is possible your exchange of fire was the catalyst for the formation of a temporal rift. (beat) History never recorded your battle with the Romulans.
 The Narendra Three outpost was wiped out.
 It is regrettable you did not succeed, Captain. If a Federation starship had rescued a Klingon outpost... it might have averted twenty years of war.
 If that is the case, what would happen if the Enterprise-C were to fly back through it?
 Right in the middle of her battle with the Romulans.
 Based on the logs of the Enterprise-C, is there any possibility she could survive that battle?
 Then sending them back would be condemning them to death.
 I need more.
 Then I can't send them back.
 Dammit, Guinan, they will die moments after they return... how can I ask them to sacrifice their lives based solely on your... intuition?
 Who is to say this history is any less proper than the other?
 Not good enough. (softly agonizing) Not good enough. I will not ask them to die.
 I cannot justify readjusting history on the basis of saving lives in war... shall I return to Sarajevo and stop the assassination of Archduke Ferdinand... or go back to warn Station-Salem Four of the Bel-zon raid...
 And what is the guarantee that by going back they will succeed... ?
 In fact, they could conceivably create a third time line.
 Every instinct tells me it's wrong and dangerous and futile.
 This is the captain. Senior officers will report to my Ready Room immediately.
 I am, Doctor.
 We can't do that. If we send this ship back with new technology... we would be altering the past...
 We're talking about restoring the past.
 (acknowledges) There are many things about her species that cannot be easily explained. Even she cannot explain how or why she senses that history has been altered. And yet it is very possible she is correct. A ship from the past has traveled through time. Who among us could know what effect that event has had on the present. Indeed, we will never know for certain if Guinan is correct. But I, for one, have decided the consequences of that possibility are too grave to ignore.
 I think I know your opinion, Commander. This is a briefing. I'm not seeking your consent.
 Even their deaths... might have prevented the war.
 If the Enterprise-C returns to the battle and its mission is a success, history will be irrevocably changed. This time line will cease to exist... and a new future will have been created. (beat) I've weighed the alternatives. I will follow Guinan's recommendations. (beat) Dismissed.
 (nods) I discovered long ago that she has a special wisdom... I've learned to trust it. (beat) If you wish, I can arrange for you to speak with her...
 I can't do that.
 By going back, you may be a great deal more helpful. The war is going badly for the Federation. Much worse than is generally known.
 Starfleet Command believes defeat is inevitable... that within six months we will have no choice but to surrender...
 One more ship will make no difference in the here and now, Captain. But twenty-two years ago, one ship could have stopped this war before it ever started.
 I know you will, Captain.
 Lieutenant Yar...
 Granted.
 Situation report...
 Captain Garrett -- damage report. (no answer) Captain Garrett...
 Go ahead.
 Any signs of other Klingon vessels?
 How soon will your ship be ready?
 (to Riker) We will maintain position to provide cover. (to Castillo) Make it so.
 Come.
 Yes, Lieutenant.
 For what reason?
 You're needed here.
 (reacts) Sit down. (she does) What did she tell you?
 (rather aghast) She felt it was necessary to disclose this to you?
 I see. (beat) You realize that it is very possible that the Enterprise-C could fail. We may be forced to remain in this time line... in which case your life would go on, hopefully for a long while.
 Lieutenant, you don't belong on that ship...
 There's no logic in it at all. (beat) Tasha, whether they succeed or not, the Enterprise-C will be destroyed...
 Lieutenant...
 Permission granted.
 Red Alert. All hands to battle stations.
 Good-bye, Lieutenant.
 They shouldn't be so confident... after the pasting we gave them at Archer Four.
 We could, of course, outrun the Klingons, but we must protect the Enterprise-C until she can enter the temporal rift. (beat) We may not survive... but we must succeed... Let's make sure they don't forget the name Enterprise.
 (coolly) Hold your fire. Mister Crusher, come about to one-four-eight mark zero-zero-three, on my command.
 Ready... and... now!
 Mister Crusher. Belay previous course change... keep us within two hundred kilometers of the Enterprise-C.
 Acknowledged, Engineer.
 Hold your course. (to Tactical) Continual fire, all phasers.
 Damage report!
 How long until the Enterprise-C enters the rift?
 All remaining power to defense systems.
 (softly) Like hell.
 Report, Lieutenant.
 Very well. Prepare a class-one sensor probe. We'll leave it behind to monitor the final closure. Mister Crusher, lay in a course for Archer Four.
 Guinan?... Yes... everything's fine. Is something wrong?
 Captain's log, Stardate 43657.0 We have arrived at sector four-eight-seven to begin charting this region of the galaxy. Commander Riker has been spared this sometimes tedious duty by virtue of a long overdue personal leave.
 (unhappy) Data...
 I would like to have been consulted.
 No, but...
 ... in your case... it's not quite the same.
 Mister Data, at your convenience, I'd like to talk to you in my Ready Room. Counselor... (please join me)
 I would suggest we do whatever we can to discourage this perception of the new android as a "child"...
 Counselor, it is not a child. It is an invention, albeit an extraordinary one.
 (frowns) If he must, fine. But I don't understand how he can call a five foot android, with heuristic learning systems and the strength of a ten men a "child".
 Data, what you have done has very serious ramifications and I am dismayed that you did not inform anyone of what you were doing.
 It is a life, Data. It cannot be activated or de-activated simply. It is a stupendous undertaking. Have you any idea what will happen when Starfleet learns of this?
 We'll see. (beat) My foremost concern is for the safety of this ship and crew. You are faster, stronger, and far more knowledgeable than any human...
 And in the event of a malfunction?
 You've taken on quite a responsibility, Mister Data...
 (trying to interrupt) Data...
 (interrupting) I'm not talking about parenting. (beat) I'm talking about the extraordinary consequences of creating new life.
 You are seeking to achieve what no one, other than your own creator, has been able to achieve -- to make another sentient, functional android. To make another Data.
 I assure you, Admiral, there's no better guide into this life for Lal than Data... He's doing an excellent job with her...
 This starship's mission is to seek out new life and that is what Commander Data is doing. Under my direction.
 As do I. (beat, conciliatory) I would be willing to consider releasing Lal and Data to join you... so he may continue his work with her.
 (dry) Aren't we all, Admiral...
 Admiral, to you Lal is a new android. But to Data, she is his child.
 Yes, Admiral. It may not be easy for you and I to see her that way. But he does. And I respect that. They will remain here for now.
 On my monitor, Lieutenant.
 Admiral.
 Not at all.
 Understood.
 Captain's log, supplemental: We are holding position pending the arrival of Admiral Haftel from Starfleet Research.
 Commander Data is completing his final neural transfers to the android he has named Lal... Which I have learned, in the language of Hindi, means "beloved".
 Picard to Data. Please report to my Ready Room.
 His visit, Data, is not just an inspection of Lal's progress. He has expressed a concern for her environment.
 He believes the Daystrom annex on Galor Four would be more suitable.
 Not you, Data. Just Lal.
 (to comm) Acknowledged, Lieutenant. Advise Mister Riker I'll want to meet with him in one hour. Picard out. (to Data) The admiral is taking the position that Lal's development should be overseen by the most experienced personnel available.
 In a manner of speaking...
 I believe he does... why?
 I beg your pardon, Admiral, but I thought you were sent here to form an opinion... not to justify one.
 It need not be difficult at all. I understand your concerns. What I'm asking for is time, patience. If you keep an open mind, I know you'll see it is imperative to keep Data and Lal together. At least for the formative stages of her development. After that, I'm sure that Commander Data will be delighted to deliver her to Starfleet Research.
 I'm convinced the damage would be irreparable if you separate them.
 They are living, sentient beings. Their rights and privileges in our society have been defined. I helped define them.
 A most significant step.
 Which Commander Data is following.
 That is a forced parallel, Admiral. M-5 was a battle computer.
 I respect the need for peer review and control precautions. I would submit that you will find them here aboard the Enterprise. My crew has served for years with Data. Unlike your research people, we have enough such experience to reliably judge what is "normal" and "abnormal" behavior for Soong-type androids. We are uniquely qualified to assist in guiding Lal's development.
 It would seem that you have actually improved upon yourself, Data.
 (cutting off a chance for Data to reply) On the other hand, Admiral, how many of your researchers are androids? None. And I would suggest that many aspects of Lal's existence and development may be so alien to human experience that your people simply could not be made to comprehend them.
 Admiral, she is working under the strict guidance of a woman in whom I have absolute trust. Ten-Forward is the center of the ship's social activity. Everyone on board comes here...
 Admiral Haftel, Guinan. She runs Ten-Forward.
 How is Lal doing, Guinan?
 The Admiral is in fact suggesting you be moved to Galor Four, Lal.
 The admiral is concerned that you need more guidance than your father can provide here on the Enterprise.
 Why don't we, Admiral? In all these discussions, we've never once mentioned Lal's wishes. She's a free, sentient being. What are your wishes, Lal?
 Thank you. You're excused.
 That's a fine argument, Admiral. But it doesn't change my feeling that the proper place for Lal to develop is by Data's side.
 This is not that time. The umbilical cord is virtually uncut. The child... (and this is the first time that Picard uses the word "child" comfortably, and he realizes it). ... the child depends on him.
 Belay that order, Commander.
 I'll take the matter to Starfleet myself.
 Hold your ground, Mister Data.
 There are times, sir, when men of good conscience cannot blindly follow orders. You acknowledge they are sentient, but ignore their personal liberty and freedom. Order a man to turn his child over to the state? Not while I am his captain. If you wish, the Enterprise is prepared to accompany you to Starfleet Command and then we'll see what...
 Acknowledged, Counselor. He's on his way. Is there a problem?
 (reacts, to Troi with sad irony) A malfunction. Emotional awareness.
 The crew grieves for your loss, Mister Data.
 Mister Data, take your position.
 Mister Crusher, set course for the starbase on Otar Two.
 Engage.
 Captain's log, Stardate 43685.2 As part of a continuing exchange program, the Enterprise is taking aboard a Klingon officer to return the recent visit of Commander Riker to the cruiser Pagh.
 the Transporter Room.
 We must take care that while he is with us, Commander Kurn is accorded all the rights and responsibilities due the first officer of this ship. If he should feel patronized in any way...
 I'm quite sure your experience aboard the Pagh will prove invaluable during the commander's tour. Be sure that the crew is prepared for any... unusual orders.
 (acknowledges) I understand that he specifically requested the Enterprise...
 Energize.
 Welcome aboard the Enterprise, Commander. I am Captain Picard.
 This is Commander William Riker who will be yielding the first officer's position to you during your tour...
 Very well... If you will accompany us to the bridge...
 May I present your bridge crew...
 (reacts) Proceed.
 By all means, Commander.
 (casually) Take us into the outer cometary cloud, Commander.
 I have attempted to select a menu that will allow you to sample a variety of dishes, Commander.
 It is from the Caspian Sea on Earth, Commander. A delicacy and a personal favorite of mine. Our replicators have never done it justice. I managed to store a few cases aboard for special occasions...
 One of the goals of the exchange program is for all of us to learn tolerance, Commander. As for my crew, it may be healthy to shake up the status quo occasionally. Feel free to disagree, Mister Riker...
 What are the allegations, Worf?
 The attack in which he himself was killed... ?
 But why now... after twenty years?
 Answer for them?
 No.
 If I understand correctly, a Starfleet officer, a respected member of my crew could stand accused of a capital crime. Your actions in this matter reflect on this ship and the Federation. (beat, personal) Therefore, it seems only appropriate for your captain to be at your side as you make your challenge, Lieutenant. I'm sure you would do no less for me.
 Commander Kurn...
 We are changing course. Set coordinates for the First City of the Klingon Imperial Empire.
 We're here as long as you need us, Worf.
 I understand. (to Kurn) You will advise us when it is appropriate to depart.
 I am here at my own request. (moving forward, to council) I am Captain Picard of the Enterprise. I extend greetings on behalf of the Federation.
 Lieutenant Worf has served under my command with distinction. He has earned my admiration and my respect. It is my greatest wish that this council in its wisdom will clear his family name and return him to duty.
 (activates com badge) Picard to Enterprise. Three to beam up.
 (quietly) Mister Data... I want you to find out everything you can about the destruction of the Khitomer outpost. Cross reference with Romulan tactics and strategic information on the region. Request access to the Klingon central information net. (on the move to Ready Room) Computer. Presentation overview of Klingon custom and law pertaining to familial accountability.
 In my Ready Room.
 I will not pretend to fully understand the nuances of your world's law or culture, Mister Worf. But I do understand when somebody is trying to hide something...
 Obviously, they did not expect and never wanted this challenge... you're getting close to something, Lieutenant... something they care a great deal about protecting...
 Of course, Lieutenant. Ask whomever you wish.
 I appreciate the gesture, Lieutenant. But I know there are stronger, younger men from which to choose...
 (perfectly pronounced) jIlajneS. ghIj qet jaghmeyjaj. I accept.
 This is my place.
 I am not here to command.
 You may test that assumption... at your convenience.
 (hits com badge) Stand by.
 (sotto voce) Go ahead, Number One.
 Well done. Picard out.
 K'mpec.
 May we have a... short recess?
 Have you heard of a woman named Kahlest?
 Then it's possible she was an eyewitness to your father's activities at Khitomer...
 She survived. She's living in the Old Quarter. I'm going to find her.
 I am your cha'DIch.
 Kahlest?
 (toward direction of voice) Your help.
 You don't even know what I want.
 Then you know that Worf's life is at stake.
 Were you with Worf's father just before the attack on Khitomer?
 Worf is not gone, Kahlest. The family you served needs you again.
 (quietly) Was his father a traitor?
 Who? Who was the traitor?
 We know a signal was sent to the Romulans just before the attack... if you were with Mogh and his family...
 (sighs, concluding) Then, there is no way to prove Mogh's innocence, and Worf will die as the son of a traitor.
 My appreciation, madam.
 Kahlest, would they know who you are? Would they recognize you?
 Then, come back with me. They do not know how much you know. Perhaps it will shake loose the truth.
 The mek'ba is not complete. I bring an eyewitness to the Khitomer massacre... with new evidence, K'mpec.
 (to Kahlest) Do not answer. (to K'mpec) Rules of the mek'ba require that her evidence be presented in open council.
 Yes, Duras, it is your dishonor we are protecting here, isn't it?
 Are you prepared to hear her evidence in open council, Duras?
 Worf's challenge is successful. His family honor must be restored, K'mpec.
 You admit the truth and still expect him to accept punishment. What does this say of an empire that holds honor so dear?
 This is unacceptable, K'mpec.
 I speak now as the captain of the USS Enterprise and Lieutenant Worf's commanding officer. You will not execute a member of my crew, sir. Nor will I turn his brother over to you.
 The alliance with the Federation is not based on lies! Protect your secrets if you must, but do not sacrifice these men.
 Lieutenant...
 Worf wants you to live... the name of your father must someday be cleared. He needs you alive... with your honor intact.
 There will be another day, Commander. Do not forget what he does here today... do not let your children forget.
 Captain's log, Stardate 43714.1. We have finally succeeded in eradicating the plague on Cor Caroli Five, and are now preparing to leave orbit and proceed to our next mission --
 an antique leather-bound book. An empty brandy snifter is nearby. CLASSICAL MUSIC plays softly.
 -- a rendezvous with the USS Hood to assist their terraforming efforts on Browder Four.
 Picard to Enterprise.
 Anyone receiving this transmission, please respond.
 It's all right. I'm not going to hurt you.
 (nods) Jean-Luc Picard of the Enterprise.
 Unfortunately, I can't, Mister...
 Well, Mister Tholl, all I know is that I've been brought here against my will. (gestures) Wherever "here" is...
 (to Tholl) And you, sir?
 What can you tell me about our captors?
 Four sleeping areas... that implies we'll be joined by another captive...
 Food?
 Why not?
 Punished -- how?
 Of course they will. They'll do everything they can. In the meantime, we keep our heads... (wryly indicating the room) ... and enjoy the hospitality.
 Attempting to show our captors that we possess intelligence.
 They may not realize we are communicating through language.
 To get their attention.
 I'll take the chance. It's imperative that we communicate with our abductors... find out what they want.
 Obviously. But why? What made our captors choose us? What makes us special?
 (points out) You're a Bolian. There are very few Bolians in Starfleet.
 What's your best area of study?
 Good enough to be useful to our abductors?
 That, I can't answer. (a beat) The Bolians are maintaining an uneasy truce with the Moropa, are they not?
 (surprised) None? In the last three hundred years of Mizarian history, your planet has been conquered six times!
 Then you have no idea who might have done this.
 Or against you personally?
 I'm not suggesting anything. I'm merely trying to come up with an explanation for your abduction.
 Nonetheless, Mister Tholl --
 It would seem a new arrival is imminent...
 Stop! We mean you no harm...
 We are prisoners, like yourself! We are not the enemy!
 We don't know. We were brought here the same way you were. Our captors refuse to show themselves.
 You must trust us. We wish only to return to our worlds. Were you abducted from Chalna?
 Yes. I visited there twelve years ago.
 Has it a meaning?
 (intervenes) Esoqq -- I've been trying to determine if we have a common enemy... someone who'd have reason to confine us here.
 You have many enemies?
 Both of you -- this is getting us nowhere.
 (unruffled) Quite a while, Mister Tholl. And I'm perfectly willing to entertain the hypothesis that our captors are Romulans. (a beat) But what would Romulans want with you?
 Food.
 It would seem so.
 Esoqq -- how long can you go without food?
 No longer?
 It's imperative.
 We can no longer afford to be patient. If we don't act soon, Esoqq will starve...
 I agree we're taking a risk. But I see no alternative.
 As you wish, Mister Tholl. (eyeing the wall) We must open this panel.
 Haro -- stand back.
 Make it so.
 Tholl -- our captors have transporters and stun beams. I hardly think they'd try to keep us at bay with a knife.
 Tholl -- I asked her to open the door.
 What I want is for all of us to escape.
 Cor Caroli Five...
 I can't.
 You're right, Tholl. Any of us could be the enemy. And there's no way to prove we aren't.
 But unless we set aside our mutual fears and trust one another, we have no hope of escape.
 And what if there is, Mister Tholl? Shall we continue accusing one another until hostility leads to violence? Shall we allow our suspicions to destroy us?
 Let's see if we can deactivate that stun mechanism...
 That would appear to be the power lead to the stun device.
 I don't think it will be. Esoqq -- your knife, please.
 You assured me you'd cooperate.
 Mister Tholl...
 I think this charade has gone far enough, don't you?
 Yes, you do. This isn't a holding cell; it's a laboratory maze -- and we're the white rats. A carefully concocted test... an experiment to see how we'd react under pressure.
 It's the only explanation. Look at the four of us... we do have something in common: we all react differently to authority. (to Esoqq) You, the anarchist, reject authority in any form... (to Tholl) ... you, the collaborator, defer to whoever's in control... (re himself) ... I, a Starfleet Captain, am trained to command... (to Haro) ... and you, a cadet, have sworn to obey a superior officer's authority. (a beat) Our captors put us here and devised obstacles for us to overcome. We were given food Esoqq couldn't eat -- to make him a threat. We were given a door that wouldn't open -- until all four of us cooperated. And each time we succeeded, we were dealt a reversal -- to set us against each other again. (to Haro) While you observed our reactions.
 I found it unlikely that a first-year cadet would know of the Enterprise's visit to Mintaka Three... so I tested you. Starfleet has classified the Cor Caroli Five plague "secret." No cadet would have knowledge of the incident.
 You may as well drop the pretense. I refuse to play along any further -- I'm quitting the game. As far as I'm concerned, this experiment is over.
 (nods grimly) And an impostor running my ship.
 Hold your positions. Take no action.
 Why did you choose to study the concepts of authority and leadership?
 You had no right to put us through this just to satisfy your curiosity.
 Because kidnapping is immoral. The lives of other races must be respected.
 (turning to Riker) Number One?
 Because there's something more you can learn from us. With an alert crew, even our "primitive vocal communications" are unnecessary. Commander Riker understood I wished to hold you here... (indicates Data) ... he had Mister Data scan you and pass the information to our security officer... (indicates Worf) ... who devised a forcefield that would entrap you.
 I've decided to perform an experiment of my own. I want to see how you react to being imprisoned.
 Captivity is an injury, regardless of how it's justified.
 And now that you've had a taste of captivity, perhaps you'll reconsider the morality of inflicting it upon others. (shrugs) In any event, we now know about your race -- and we know how to imprison you. Bear that in mind. (a beat) Now get off my ship.
 Mister Crusher. Set course for our rendezvous with the Hood... Warp eight.
 Status, Number One?
 Then my doppelganger caused no serious damage. (a beat) Was the replica convincing?
 Not perfect in what way?
 A singer?
 I look forward to reading your report, Commander. At least, I think I do.
 Doctor...
 Engage.
 Break us out of orbit, Mister Bennett. Set a course for Starbase twelve.
 (continuing) Report, Number One.
 Very well...
 (continuing) If anyone needs me, I'll be in my Ready Room.
 About what?
 Come.
 How so?
 It doesn't sound all that serious.
 Recommended treatment.
 Impossible.
 But you won't... Beverly you know I loathe vacations.
 I lied. (an idea) The Enterprise is scheduled to spend a week undergoing a maintenance overhaul at Starbase twelve. While there, I promise to make full use of all available recreation activities.
 I suppose I could find a few hours to spend on the Holodeck.
 The Astrophysics Center on Icor Nine is holding a symposium on rogue star clusters. I had given serious thought to attending.
 I'll give it serious thought.
 Beverly... enough.
 Not you too.
 How convenient. Except I have absolutely no intention of taking a holiday. Do I make myself clear?
 Good. I'm glad we've got that straightened out. (to computer) Resume.
 (together) ... the women...
 ... of course.
 I'm sure I would.
 Unfortunately, this vessel is about to undergo extensive repairs requiring my personal supervision.
 Some other time, Number One.
 Your mother?
 Did she?
 Commander, I'd like a word with you. In private.
 Tell me, Number One, is the entire crew aware of this little scheme to send me off on holiday?
 I suppose this means I can look forward to a week of continual harassment on the subject.
 I admit I have been feeling a bit fatigued.
 I thought I'd take along some light reading... in case I got bored.
 To each his own, Number One.
 You want me to bring you back a souvenir?
 Consider it done.
 I don't think that will be necessary, Lieutenant. Risa has a reputation of being a most peaceful planet.
 The ship is yours, Number One.
 I'll try, Counselor.
 Pardon me.
 I think you've mistaken me for someone else.
 (to himself) A simple handshake would have sufficed.
 So it would seem.
 No. It's just that you're the fifth woman to ask me that this morning... All I require is to sit here in the sun and read my book. Alone.
 I really haven't thought that far ahead.
 Some other time perhaps.
 I just purchased that. (suddenly suspicious) Why? Are you implying it holds some special meaning?
 (softly but emphatically) Riker!
 I don't even know what it means. (quickly) Nor do I want to. The Horga'hn is for a friend.
 That's right.
 I wouldn't go that far.
 That's all I ask.
 You're blocking the sun.
 Are you addressing me?
 I don't know what the devil you're talking about. But whatever it is, I assure you it's no concern of mine.
 Perhaps I haven't made myself clear. You have the wrong man.
 You'll find Ferengi demands carry little weight with me.
 On the contrary, I have. All too often.
 Or trusted.
 I advise you to listen closely for I will not say this again. I came to Risa for a holiday, nothing more. I have no knowledge of this woman you refer to, nor have I laid eyes on any disc.
 (with an edge) I don't particularly care what you believe.
 Oh, it's you.
 Look, I don't mean to appear rude, but I am not seeking Jamaharohn.
 If I "try it", it will be at a time of my own choosing.
 I assumed by the way you welcomed me the other day...
 I don't recall saying I was embarrassed.
 Let's just say I prefer to be acquainted with the women I kiss.
 Jean-Luc Picard.
 (scowling) Is that really necessary?
 I'm captain of a Federation starship.
 Explains what?
 You're the woman he was talking about?
 For the answer to that I suggest you ask him.
 To find some privacy.
 I don't. And I don't want to.
 It would seem you two have a lot to discuss. If you'll excuse me...
 Perhaps you can.
 What are you doing in my room?
 Let's assume for the moment I believe you. That you are indeed from the future. What is it that you want from me?
 I'm aware of the legend. It tells of a visitor from the future who left behind a mysterious device known as the Tox Uthat.
 Then the Uthat actually exists.
 But why bring such a powerful weapon into the past?
 I gather you were unsuccessful.
 And the search led you to me?
 I'm sorry to disappoint you, but I haven't found a thing -- including peace, which is the only thing I'm looking for.
 And if I do find it, what then?
 The Uthat belongs to your time -- not mine.
 May I come in?
 Is this what he's looking for?
 This disc must contain some very valuable information.
 That depends.
 On whether or not this has anything to do with the Tox Uthat.
 Let's just say I've heard... rumors that the Uthat is located somewhere on Risa.
 Then it's true.
 As a matter of fact, I have. He spent half his life searching for the Uthat. (off her reaction) Archaeology is a hobby of mine.
 So you're continuing his work?
 With a Ferengi as an associate.
 But the two of you are well acquainted.
 And now with typical Ferengi logic, he's convinced that the Uthat belongs to him.
 I take it you have a more noble purpose in mind.
 Then I'll go in your place.
 You'll remain here. It's safer.
 From the moment we met I knew you were going to be trouble.
 How far is it to our destination?
 I'll meet you in the lobby in fifteen minutes. Be punctual. (a beat) I advise you to change clothing.
 Didn't anyone tell you weapons aren't allowed on Risa?
 You are becoming quite an annoyance, Sovak.
 We have a long trip ahead of us.
 Have you calculated how much further we have to go?
 We'll remain here for the night.
 We made better time than I expected.
 As it was intended.
 Forgive me if I don't act surprised.
 Then you did steal it.
 But you took Sovak's money.
 Well, any woman who can beat a Ferengi at his own game, bears watching.
 (gruffly) We should get some sleep.
 That happens to be why I came to Risa.
 Excitement? Sleeping in a damp cave... chasing after something we'll probably never find?
 I suppose I am.
 Good. Now go to sleep.
 That was a simple misunderstanding.
 You can be the most irritating woman sometimes.
 You call this getting along?
 Do I?
 I'm sure of it.
 Do you have an exact location?
 That should put it right about here.
 Is something wrong?
 That leaves us but one alternative.
 Shall we?
 (seeing it's the Vorgons) A bit early, aren't you?
 They're security officers from the twenty-seventh century. They're here to take back the Uthat.
 My apologies Vash... But if I had told you, would you have brought me here?
 My point exactly.
 (coldly to Sovak) How did you get here?
 I see no reason to continue.
 Look around Sovak, by now it must be obvious even to you... the Uthat is not here.
 It would appear so.
 (firmly) It's over, Sovak.
 There are other treasures to be found, Vash.
 I quite understand.
 Picard here.
 I will be returning shortly, Commander. In the interim, stand ready to initiate Transporter Code Fourteen at my signal.
 You heard me, Number One.
 Picard out.
 Leaving so soon?
 Well then, I've saved you the bother.
 Of course. However, there is one last thing you can do for me.
 Show me where you've hidden the Tox Uthat.
 You never intended to burn that second disc. If you had, you wouldn't have been so careless as to allow Sovak to salvage any of it. You wanted him to follow us so he could see for himself that the Uthat wasn't at the cave site. It was the only way to convince him your quest had been futile.
 Because you had gone there once before. Probably the moment you arrived on the planet. That's when you found it.
 A very dangerous piece. Were you really going to give it to the Daystom Institute?
 I assume the Vorgons have proof to back up their claims.
 You're going to have to prove you are who you say you are.
 But not necessarily to you.
 Enterprise... Code Fourteen... Lock on present coordinates... three second delay... Mark!
 Are you all right?
 (forcefully) Go. Return to your own time. There's nothing for you here.
 (smiling) Somehow I doubt you'd find life aboard a starship suitable to your taste.
 What are your plans?
 But the Sarthongians deal harshly with trespassers.
 You will try and stay out of trouble.
 (smiling) Perhaps we do. (off her questioning look) The Vorgons are time travelers. Now that they know where and when the Uthat can be found, they may very well come back and try for it again.
 Picard to Transporter Room. One to beam up.
 Thank you, Commander. Status report.
 I'll present my compliments to the crew. Oh yes... and Number One... about that Horga'hn you requested.
 We need to have a little chat about that.
 Captain's log, Stardate 43779.3. The Enterprise is preparing detailed atmospheric charts of the Hayashi system. Although tedious, this endeavor is the first step toward planet colonization.
 their stations. DATA and WESLEY are at Ops and Conn.
 That's odd... I wasn't notified of a rendezvous.
 On screen.
 Robert, why didn't you inform us --
 So, old friend. How are you?
 But not today.
 If time is so important, why didn't they transmit the orders by subspace?
 What sort of passenger?
 Mister Data, come with me --
 You know him?
 Ah, I see. He was a colleague, then.
 Welcome aboard the Enterprise. I'm --
 Number One?
 Meet Mister Data on the bridge. He has our orders and new heading.
 (continuing) And assemble the bridge staff for a mission briefing in -- fifteen minutes. Picard out. (to Tam) Mister Elbrun. Would you --
 (immediately fascinated) Alive? How so?
 The Romulans --
 They claim the sector of space in which Beta Stromgren is located.
 So it's quite certain they'll be sending a ship of their own to investigate this Tin Man.
 So, it's a race? (thoughtfully) An alien intelligence -- a new life-form -- representing a technology far beyond that of either the Romulans or ourselves. The Romulans will take whatever measures -- military or otherwise -- are required to secure the creature for study.
 Data, you're our resident honor student in exobiology. I'm assigning you to head up life sciences on this mission.
 Meeting adjourned, then.
 Mister Elbrun -- one reason I want you to work closely with a member of my staff is to avoid any further... omissions. The possibility of an encounter with Romulans on this mission is hardly trivial. Yet you --
 Captain's log, Stardate 43782.6. Travelling at top warp, we are still several days from rendezvous with the mysterious entity which Starfleet has christened Tin Man.
 (continuing) My immediate concern is with Tam Elbrun. Starfleet considers his unique abilities crucial to our mission. Yet he seems to me... unstable.
 A prodigy? In what sense?
 They're not born reading minds?
 How "different?"
 (to Troi) You mentioned a hospitalization --
 Yes, well, he's evidently done more than "hold together". He's the indispensable man -- the Federation's finest specialist in communication with unknown life-forms.
 Status, Number One?
 Grand.
 On screen, Mister Data.
 Magnify.
 Remarkable. Computer -- locate Tam Elbrun.
 Of course.
 On screen.
 Go to Red Alert -- shields at maximum.
 Evasive, Mister Worf. Data, open hailing frequencies --
 Damage report.
 Incidental?
 A one-way trip.
 You read all this, telepathically --
 Very well, then. Mister Crusher all stop.
 Commander La Forge.
 Geordi -- how long to restore shields?
 Go ahead.
 You have ten.
 Picard out. (to the group in general) The Romulans wish the honor of the first contact, let them have it.
 I think the chances of that are remote. And, Mister Elbrun, if you'll be still you may learn --
 That being first, at any cost, is not always the point. (MORE)
 (pause) Data, while we await repairs, I want Life Sciences and Engineering to continue collecting information on the alien. Query the Vega Nine probe, and the long-range sensors.
 Yellow Alert. Prepare for evasive action at the first change in the Romulans' course.
 What do you mean? They intend to destroy it?
 (to Wesley) Increase speed to intercept the Romulans.
 Worf, hail them. I cannot allow --
 Worf! Damage report!
 You did this. You woke your Tin Man.
 Good. I want to know exactly what you did. I want to know how closely you are in communication with the alien, and what you've learned about it. Now.
 Where did it come from? How many...
 Once?
 Perhaps we can help it in some way. Can you ask it to return with us to Federation space? Or at least to remove itself from the vicinity of Beta Stromgren, before the star explodes?
 No. Absolutely out of the question.
 No. I don't believe that I do.
 (continuing) Tam -- when you reached out to the alien, to warn it -- did you give any thought to this vessel? To the danger, however inadvertent, the creature might pose to our crew? Or did you simply react out of instinct?
 Data, you and Tam Elbrun seem to have developed an affinity. Troi, you've known him for years. How far can he be trusted?
 Yes, of course. But his judgment...
 Afraid of what?
 Thank you both.
 Data?
 Data -- Elbrun warned Tin Man, and the first thing it did was to destroy a space vessel.
 Counselor Troi understands him better.
 Status Number One?
 Well, let's hope they're in a mood to talk. Open hailing frequencies.
 Romulan vessel -- this is Captain Jean-Luc Picard of the USS Enterprise.
 We are not familiar with the terms of your claim on this sector, Commander. We are here engaged in scientific research. Do you wish to participate --
 Captain's log, Supplemental. Light-years beyond the edges of explored space, and virtually disabled, our survival may now depend upon Tam Elbrun's telepathic rapport with an alien intelligence.
 Picard to Tam Elbrun.
 Report to Transporter Room Six immediately.
 (to Tam) Commander Data will meet you there.
 Counselor, we no longer have a choice.
 Go ahead, Chief.
 Red Alert... Mister Worf... arm photon torpedos.
 Commander -- we are prepared to defend the life of the alien. (to Worf) Shields up.
 (to Riker) It's beginning.
 The Romulans know that as well as we do.
 Conn -- report.
 Data.
 Data -- what happened, over there?
 Captain's log, supplemental. With all main systems at least temporarily restored, we are proceeding to Starbase one fifty-two for inspection and additional repairs.
 (continuing) We have had no further encounter with the Romulans. As for the whereabouts of Tin Man, and Tam Elbrun -- we can only speculate.
 Captain's log, Stardate 43807.4. We are taking on a load of special tissue samples donated by the Mikulaks for shipment to Nahmi Four. The samples could prove vital to the containment of an outbreak of Correllium Fever on that world.
 I'm not accustomed to seeing an unsatisfactory rating for one of my crew.
 (to Geordi) I assume from your request for his transfer that you don't think he is, Commander...
 Broccoli?
 Let's get it uncaught, shall we?
 By all indications, Barclay has served honorably in Starfleet for many years. His rating aboard the Zhukov was satisfactory... I recall Captain Gleason speaking quite highly of him before his transfer...
 And yet he chose this way of life; he's made the same commitment to Starfleet that we all have... (beat) It's easy to transfer our problem to someone else. Too easy.
 Try harder.
 He's on your team. Manage him. Pull him in. Find ways to help him make a positive contribution. Get to know the man. Make him your best friend.
 I suggest you put your personal discomfort with him aside, Commander. Dismissed.
 Will your investigation affect our available power during the mission, Lieutenant?
 Good. I look forward to your report, Mister Broccoli.
 Barclay.
 Is this part of the same pattern?
 (to Riker) We have twenty-two hours before we reach Nahmi Four. We'll need the transporters operational by then. I want a level one diagnostic across the board. (TECH)
 Report...
 Maintain that. What the hell happened?
 (pressing insignia) Picard to La Forge.
 Any explanation for the injector problem?
 Another malfunction?
 Yes, I would say you should, Commander. Your Holodeck activities can wait until later. And Commander...
 It would be wise to consult Lieutenant Barclay on this latest incident.
 Go ahead, Commander.
 Take us out of warp.
 Red Alert.
 Begin evacuation of secondary hull. Prepare for emergency saucer separation.
 The question is, will the injectors come back on-line?
 Make it so.
 Transfer injector control to manual.
 Cycle power through ventral relay.
 Stand down from Red Alert.
 Understood.
 Captain's log, Stardate 43872.2. In order to neutralize a sudden contamination of the water supply at the Federation colony on Beta Agni Two, we are procuring one hundred and eight kilos of hytritium from the Zibalian trader, Kivas Fajo.
 Because pure hytritium is too unstable for our transporters, Lieutenant Commander Data has been shuttling the material to the Enterprise.
 Go ahead, Mister Data.
 Acknowledged. Mister Worf, advise Beta Agni Two that our departure is imminent.
 On viewer.
 (to Worf) Hail the Jovis -- I want to speak with Kivas Fajo.
 On screen.
 It is unclear at this time; we're running a full analysis.
 No.
 Mister Fajo, I would like to analyze your sensor readings of the explosion.
 Perhaps, but I want to leave no avenue unexplored.
 (to Riker) How much hytritium did we manage to bring on board?
 (to Fajo) I realize we have acquired your complete supply of hytritium. Do you know where we could obtain more?
 Mister Fajo, thank you for your help.
 Mister Crusher, lay in a course for Beta Agni Two, warp six.
 Very good, Number One.
 Engage.
 (a beat, sighs) I know it's hard to accept, but even the best...
 What are you suggesting, Commander?
 (stands) I'm sure you've done a complete investigation. If you wish to continue it, you have my support of course. But we'll be reaching the Beta Agni system shortly. I expect you to be rested.
 Dismissed.
 Geordi... I understand how much we want... even need to explain an accident like this. Sometimes there just aren't any explanations.
 We must select an officer to replace Data at Ops. Recommendations?
 Mine as well. Make it so.
 (One line of Shakespeare that provides the perfect epitaph to Data.)
 Go ahead, Commander.
 Acknowledged.
 Mister Crusher, take us into a close orbit. Mister Data, scan the --
 My apologies, Mister Worf. Scan the colony's subsurface water.
 Any indication of the source?
 Launch probe.
 Specify.
 Computer, report on geologic instability on Beta Agni Two.
 Number One, perhaps you should take an away team down and have a closer look.
 You're suggesting he created the problem just to solve it?
 Computer, biographical file on trader Kivas Fajo.
 Computer, that will suffice.
 (keys insignia) Mister Crusher...
 Set course for the site of the shuttlepod explosion. Warp eight.
 He's a trader... he doesn't attract customers by being hard to find...
 Make it so.
 Mister Crusher, new coordinates... set a course for Lya Four...
 Engage.
 Captain's log, Stardate 43917.4 The Enterprise has been given the singular honor of hosting the first face to face meeting between the Federation and the mysterious race of beings known as the Legarans. We are in orbit around Vulcan preparing to welcome aboard the Federation ambassador that has made this historic event possible.
 They are in dress uniforms.
 I met him once... Many years ago, just briefly at his son's wedding. (smiles at memory) But I'll tell you it was quite a moment for a young lieutenant. Standing in the presence of such history... I was a little tongue-tied to be quite frank...
 Indeed. After all, how does one make small talk with a man who has virtually shaped the Federation...
 Unofficially, that's what I hear. And what a crowning achievement this will be to his career. The benefits of relations with the Legarans are incalculable.
 Has the ambassador been delayed?
 By all means.
 Yes, I believe that the ambassador is extremely fond of Mozart.
 You have my assurance that the ambassador will not be disturbed during our voyage.
 Welcome aboard the Enterprise Ambassador Sarek.
 Your service honors us.
 Mrs. Sarek.
 This is my first officer, Commander Riker.
 No Ambassador. Commander La Forge and Ensign Crusher are---
 Ambassador, please be assured that everything will be ready by the time the conference begins.
 I hope I'm that frail when I'm two hundred and two. His aides did seem a little overprotective, didn't they?
 Nevertheless, we will honor Mister Mendrossen's request and allow Ambassador Sarek his privacy. (beat, sighs) I suppose they were foolish and vain, my expectations of this voyage. Sharing his thoughts, his memories, his unique understanding of the history he has made...
 No, the concert will go on as scheduled. But it is a pity that the guest of honor will be absent.
 I think that's an excellent idea.
 The bridge is yours, Number One.
 I hope I'm not intruding.
 Actually, I came to see you.
 I find that hard to believe.
 The honor is ours.
 (reacts with pleasure) High praise from a Vulcan.
 Logical.
 I have come to extend my personal invitation to you... and your husband, if he is available, to attend a Mozart recital this evening.
 I'm sure it could be arranged.
 Well, then I hope to see you tonight.
 I noticed that Lieutenant Worf put Ensign D'Amato on report... for insubordination.
 Indeed he has. Look into it, Number One. (beat) I assume work has been progressing in the conference room?
 Ambassador Sarek, Perrin... on behalf of my entire crew, welcome.
 This is Commander Data. He will be the featured soloist this evening.
 At your convenience, Commander.
 (reacts) Are you suggesting it is somehow contagious?
 This is one hell of a time... (beat, to Riker) Whatever it is, I don't want it to affect the ambassador... I want his quarters isolated from the rest of the crew until we can identify the cause.
 Sarek?
 (a small realization) He cried. I saw that. I didn't believe it. A Vulcan moved to tears by music... ?
 What would cause such a loss of control?
 I can't imagine anything that would be more offensive to a Vulcan. Their emotional detachment is the very core of their being. (beat) But why would it affect others aboard the ship?
 And when the Legarans beam aboard...
 Is there a treatment?
 Sarek has built a personal relationship with them. They will accept no one else. (MORE)
 (beat) How can we confirm your diagnosis?
 I have twelve hours.
 Nevertheless, I believe we are facing a potentially far worse...
 Mister Mendrossen...
 I cannot explain that. Hundreds of others on board have not been affected either. I have not. The effects appear to be random. Proximity apparently has no bearing on the phenomenon.
 (to comm) Mister Data, please report to my Ready Room.
 Ironic isn't it? Despite our magnificent technology, we find ourselves still susceptible to the ravages of old age. The loss of dignity, the slow betrayal of our bodies by forces we cannot master.
 (a beat) Still want to be one of us, Data?
 Yes... ?
 Logic fails us sometimes, Data. This is one of those times. I can only guess that he does not see or does not wish to see the truth. And he is being insulated from that truth by those who love him the most.
 (quietly) It is not a task I look forward to.
 What would you have me do... march down there and destroy the man?
 I know --
 Don't you tell me...
 (nodding with grim resignation) You're right of course, Number One. But I am loathe to do what I must do.
 He is very ill, Perrin.
 There is one now. Sakkath knows.
 He knows. More than that, he has been consciously holding Sarek's mind together on this mission as well as he could...
 I must see Sarek.
 I'm sorry.
 The loss is mine, Ambassador.
 Unfortunately the results would not be available for several days... which is why I must ask for a postponement of the conference.
 Then why must Sakkath help you contain your emotions?
 I hope I have not embarrassed you, Ambassador.
 I believe you are affected, sir... far more than you realize.
 There has been an epidemic of violent incidents aboard the Enterprise. As we speak, the situation is worsening.
 My chief medical officer has explored all other probable causes.
 That is correct.
 She is... but the fact remains that these incidents began shortly after your arrival.
 Is it also coincidence, that your wife and chief of staff have been carefully isolating you?
 Surely Sakkath is not influenced by emotions.
 (starting to press) But you did need his help at the concert.
 (continuing) Or perhaps you have a logical explanation for what happened that night?
 I saw you crying.
 I was there... I saw the tears.
 (forceful) Then you were emotionally affected by the music.
 You still have not answered me, Sarek. Is it logical for a Vulcan to cry?
 (pressing) No other logical solutions? But Ambassador, there are always other solutions. You have said so yourself many times.
 Sarek of Vulcan was never afraid to look straight at something he did not want to see.
 Sarek of Vulcan never confused what he wanted with the truth.
 Is that anger I hear in your voice?
 Captain's log, supplemental. In three hours time we are scheduled to meet with the Legaran delegation. However it is now all too evident that Ambassador Sarek is in no condition to proceed with the conference.
 (turns) No. (off Riker's look) I will present our regrets to the Legarans personally. It is vital that they understand our reasons for cancelling the negotiations.
 But at what cost, Number One?
 Come.
 (surprised) Perrin?
 (with concern) How is the ambassador?
 You know that's impossible.
 He will never lose that respect.
 I'm not blaming anyone.
 Believe me, nothing would give me greater pleasure. But there's nothing I can do.
 Yes, Ambassador, I do. But I also realize the potential benefits.
 Which, for a few hours, should provide you with the emotional control you need. Enough time for you to meet with the Legarans and conclude the treaty.
 I am aware of the risks, Sarek. But I believe it is the only... logical solution.
 I didn't expect you would, Beverly.
 I'm afraid not. Though I do admit to a certain... trepidation. (beat, then smiling) Your company is appreciated.
 Come.
 Doctor Crusher will be monitoring our responses.
 NO!!!
 It is wrong. A lifetime of discipline washed away, and in its place... bedlam... (MORE)
 Nothing but bedlam. (angry) And I am helpless to prevent it! I am old! Nothing left but dry bones and dead friends. (exhausted) Weary, so weary.
 No! This weakness disgusts me! I hate it! Where is the logic? I am betrayed by desires... I want to... feel... to feel everything! (a whisper) But I am Vulcan. (voice rising) I must feel nothing. Give me back control...
 Perrin... (tears begin to stream down his face) Amanda... I could have given you so much more. I wanted to show you tenderness. But it is not our way. Spock... Amanda did you know... ? Perrin, can you know... how much I... love you? (anguished cry) I do love you!
 (a hoarse whisper) Beverly...
 It's so... difficult.
 The anguish in the man... despair... pouring out... so many... feelings... regrets...
 I can't stop them...
 I hope your journey aboard the Merrimac will be uneventful.
 He... loves you... very much.
 I hope you are wrong, Ambassador.
 I believe I got the best part of that bargain, Ambassador.
 Peace and long life, Sarek.
 Captain's Log, Stardate 43980.7. The Enterprise has been in attendance at the biennial Trade Agreements Conference on Betazed.
 For the first time, the Ferengi are present, and I have reluctantly consented to their boarding the Enterprise for the closing reception.
 (lifting glass) A toast to the success of the trade conference, Reittan. I must admit, I had some doubts when you invited the Ferengi.
 (not now, Data) Thank you, Data. (to Reittan Grax) It was thoughtful of you to include Lwaxana Troi as part of the Betazed delegation.
 I'm sure Counselor Troi appreciates this opportunity to spend time with her mother.
 (thinking fast) Uh... perhaps later, Lwaxana. Data and I were just about to show Reittan Grax the new door mechanisms on the aft Turbolifts. Would you excuse us?
 Indeed, Number One. Fine work -- especially you, Mister Crusher. We're going to miss you.
 As you might guess, your final entrance examination scores for Starfleet Academy have arrived. (a beat) Congratulations. As soon as you complete the oral exam, you'll be formally admitted.
 That will be all.
 A moment, Number One.
 Your science team is very efficient. How many days would you say they managed to shave off our mission?
 Splendid, Number One. (a beat) You'd agree that this is a rather routine mapping mission?
 Counselor Troi had the good sense to request shore leave. I see I'm going to have to suggest it to you.
 Have a good time, Number One.
 (indicating screen) It's almost incomprehensible, the amount of energy being expended...
 Perhaps... but that takes away none of the wonder.
 Good. Contact Commander Riker on Betazed.
 (concerned) On screen.
 Our communications were blocked by the nebula, Reittan. Is there a problem?
 We now have a reasonable hypothesis as to whom.
 Commander Riker will assume that we'll be searching for them... he'll find some way to send us a message. (a beat) Mister Worf, I want continual monitoring of all Ferengi subspace frequencies. Mister La Forge, can you extend our sensor range?
 Make it so.
 Not until we have someplace to go.
 Can we locate the Krayton?
 Gentlemen, I have the utmost confidence in your ability to perform the impossible.
 Mister Crusher -- now. We have no time for lengthy farewells. Good luck.
 Wesley, unless you leave immediately, you'll miss --
 (to Worf) Signal the Bradbury they may depart. (to Data) Play back the Ferengi transmissions...
 Then it is a signal from Commander Riker. (with admiration) Ingenious. He selected a signal we'd recognize... but one the Ferengi would dismiss as static.
 Plot an intercept course.
 Well done, Mister Crusher. Warp Eight.
 Engage.
 You're both all right?
 (to Worf) Hail the Krayton.
 Of course you were. But you're still holding Lwaxana Troi.
 It's not over, Lwaxana. You're mine and I refuse to let you go. Return to my side immediately.
 "My love is a fever, longing still For that which longer nurseth the disease."
 "In faith, I do not love thee with mine eyes, For they in thee a thousand errors note; But 'tis my heart that loves what they despise; Who in despite of view is pleas'd to dote."
 Listen, Tog, no one possesses Lwaxana but me. And if I have to destroy your ship in the process, so be it.
 That can be arranged. Mister Worf, arm all phaser banks and photon torpedoes. If my beloved is not in my arms in ten seconds, throw everything you've got at the Krayton.
 (shrugs) 'Tis better to have loved and lost than never to have loved at all... Eight, seven...
 Six... five...
 Three... two...
 Such as reporting this incident to your superiors who may question your competency as Daimon? I'll think about it. (to Worf) Screen off.
 Mrs. Troi, I'm truly grateful that you risked your life for my... (breaks free) ...people. I'll have you home within hours.
 Perhaps another time. Mister Crusher, set course for Betazed. (glancing at Lwaxana) Warp Nine.
 I've been in touch with Admiral Hahn at Starfleet Academy.
 The Admiral regrets your missing the oral examination and hopes you'll reapply next year.
 In the interim... the Academy's loss is our gain. I'm gratified the Enterprise will continue to benefit from your talents for another year.
 There is one more thing.
 For some time now I have been contemplating a certain action. Your conduct today has convinced me to take that action.
 I've reviewed your service record thoroughly... and I've decided upon the appropriate course.
 I am granting you a field promotion to full Ensign.
 Congratulations. (a beat) You're dismissed.
 (to Worf) Notify Starfleet we are en route to the Xanthras system for our rendezvous with the Zapata.
 Ensign Crusher, take us out of orbit and set course for Xanthras Three, Warp Factor Six.
 Engage.
 Captain's Log, Stardate 43957.2. We are presently charting an unknown star system located in the Zeta Gelis cluster. This rather routine assignment has made for a refreshingly quiet time aboard the Enterprise.
 
 (thoughtfully) An escape pod... then it couldn't have travelled very far. Mister Data, any signs of other ships in this area?
 The remains of a larger vessel. He must have left in the pod before the ship was destroyed.
 Were you able to salvage anything from the escape pod?
 Can you access it?
 Keep me apprised of your progress.
 (indicating John) How's your patient, Beverly?
 What are his chances?
 Go on.
 Cell regeneration?
 Any theory as to what's causing it?
 Captain's Log: Stardate 43960.6. Our mission to map the Zeta Gelis star cluster is proceeding on schedule. Meanwhile, Doctor Crusher reports that the recovery of the patient she has named John Doe continues at a remarkable pace.
 And I envy your strength of will. Doctor Crusher has kept me informed of your progress. It's quite extraordinary.
 Tell me John, are you still unable to recall anything at all about your past?
 We're quite certain of that. But you have no idea how you came to be in that escape pod, or what happened to your ship?
 (to Beverly) Have you tried synaptic induction?
 (to Beverly) Not a relapse I hope.
 Still no theory as to what's causing it?
 You found something?
 Can you match these stars to our charts?
 Good. Then we can continue our mission without significant interruption.
 Yes... using the information we found in your escape pod, we may be able to return you to your people.
 And why is that?
 Escape what?
 We will not arrive in your star system for at least three weeks. That gives us plenty of time to discuss this matter further.
 It is... understandable.
 What configuration?
 Time to intercept?
 Try to hail them, Mister Worf.
 Monitor their approach... repeat hail every half hour.
 You admit you were trying to steal a shuttlecraft.
 So I ask you again -- why?
 Unacceptable. You had a reason -- I want to know what it was.
 (sharply) Dammit, I'm entitled to an answer. You nearly killed a member of my crew.
 I am not forgetting that. It's the only reason he's here, and not in the brig.
 Why? Why is it dangerous? What is happening to you?
 (frustrated and worried) Who are you? What are you?
 As Lieutenant Worf discovered.
 On my way. (to Beverly and John) Take him back to Sickbay. I want him under constant surveillance.
 Raise shields. Slow to one-third impulse and bring us to one-zero-three mark zero-two-five. Mister Worf, hail the alien vessel.
 On screen.
 You know him?
 I am Captain Jean-Luc Picard, of the United Federation of Planets. We intend no transgression of --
 (re: John) Sunad -- this individual is our guest. We found him dying in a shipwreck and returned him to health.
 Of what is he accused?
 In what way?
 Counselor. Do they mean to carry out their threat?
 Commander Riker, Counselor, Doctor. John, I'd like you to join us.
 Mister Data, you have the Bridge. Mister Worf -- stay at Tactical. Counter any moves the Zalkonian makes.
 They make serious accusations against you...
 You understand the difficult position in which I'm placed.
 I'll inform you of my decision shortly.
 (sharply) We must consider all options, Doctor, without letting our personal feelings impede our judgment.
 Exactly. Whether we approve of the Zalkonians' motives is not at issue. (a beat) For what it's worth, I suspect John may be correct that his existence has broader ramifications than that of a simple criminal.
 It is not up to us to judge their laws, Doctor.
 Commander, let me remind you we are on a mission of exploration... our purpose is to establish peaceful relations with the civilizations we encounter.
 If that is your wish -- we will respect it.
 Commander, we will leave. It is not our policy to intervene in the affairs of other cultures.
 But before I return the survivor to you, I would appreciate a more detailed explanation of what he has done to merit a death sentence.
 Agreed. However, there are circumstances of which you may be unaware. The survivor has suffered a memory loss -- he is, therefore, ill-equipped to defend himself against your accusations.
 Since his recovery, he has manifested unusual abilities --
 He apparently has the power to heal injuries with a simple touch...
 -- and even to reverse death itself --
 It is our mission to seek out life... in all its forms. We are privileged to have been present at the emergence of a new species.
 Captain's log, Stardate 43994.1. The Enterprise has arrived at Jouret Four in response to a distress signal from one of the Federation's outermost colonies.
 Captain's log, Stardate 43997.6. Admiral Hanson and Lieutenant Commander Shelby of Starfleet Tactical have arrived to review the disappearance of New Providence colony. No sign remains of the nine hundred inhabitants.
 (acknowledges) Mister Riker wrote those reports... he agrees with you.
 If this is the Borg, it would indicate they have a source of power far superior to our own...
 (to Riker) Why don't you show the commander to her quarters...
 You seem rather taken with her, J.P.
 Earl Grey?
 I already have a hell of a first officer.
 One's available?
 Well, I guess I knew this day would have to come... he'll make a fine captain, J.P.
 Captain's log, Stardate 43998.5. With confirmation of the Borg's presence in Federation space, Admiral Hanson has returned to Starbase three two four to discuss strategy with Starfleet Command. Lieutenant Commander Shelby remains on board to continue tactical preparations.
 Very good, Number One. You've covered all the bases. As usual. (beat) What's your impression of Shelby?
 She has your full confidence...
 Sounds a little like a young lieutenant commander I once recruited as my first officer.
 You're the best officer I've ever served with, Will.
 (most gentle) But what are you still doing here?
 I hear you've been offered the Melbourne.
 She's a fine ship, Will.
 Starfleet needs good captains. Particularly now. I cannot keep you to myself forever.
 I want you to reconsider your decision.
 I'm asking you to look at your career objectively and make the best decision. (beat) I know it's hard to walk away. But you're ready to work without a net, my friend. You're ready to make the life and death decisions a captain must make. And, hard as it is to accept, if you choose to leave, the Enterprise will go on just fine without you.
 How long to get there at warp nine, Mister Data?
 Make it so.
 (dry) We'll try to occupy them pending your arrival, Admiral.
 Commander Shelby, status of defense preparations?
 Your assessment of our potential effectiveness?
 (acknowledges) Dismissed.
 Hail them, Mister Worf...
 Move to intercept.
 On screen.
 Magnify.
 Mister Worf, dispatch a subspace message to Admiral Hanson -- we have engaged the Borg.
 I am?
 On screen.
 I am Jean-Luc...
 You have committed acts of aggression against the United Federation of Planets. If you do not immediately withdraw...
 Their priorities seem to have changed. Open channel. (to the viewscreen) We have developed new defense capabilities since our last meeting and we are prepared to use them if you do not withdraw from Federation space. If you do so immediately, I will agree to arrange a conference of our peoples at a neutral location.
 Load all torpedo bays... ready phasers... target coordinates on the source of the tractor beam...
 Fire all weapons...
 Fire at will...
 Warp nine. Course one-five-one mark three-three-zero... engage...
 Maintain course.
 Drop to impulse... take us in, Ensign...
 Steady... Mister Data, analysis of the nebula cloud...
 Prepare to take us in, Mister Crusher. Now. Mister La Forge, prepare to reverse engines, full stop.
 Good. As long as they're looking for us... they can't hurt anyone else.
 We'll maintain position. (looks at Riker and Shelby) Until we have a better idea.
 Come.
 Come in, Number One... Commander Shelby was just telling me of your concerns about her plan...
 Yes, I entirely agree with you. It's not the time. But I am afraid the time may eventually come when greater risks are required. I'd like you to consider her plan as a fall-back position and make the necessary preparations.
 Captain's log, supplemental. The Enterprise remains concealed in the dust cloud. And to my surprise, the Borg have maintained their position, waiting for us to come out of hiding. I have no explanation for their special interest in me or this ship.
 We continue to prepare our defenses for the inevitable confrontation. But, I must admit, on this night I contemplate the distinct possibility that no defense may be adequate against this enemy...
 Something of a tradition, Guinan... touring the ship before a battle...
 Not necessarily. Nelson toured the HMS Victory before Trafalgar...
 No, but the battle was won.
 We may yet prevail. It is a conceit but a healthy one. (beat) I wonder if the Emperor Honorious watching the Visigoths coming over the seventh hill could truly realize that the Roman Empire was about to fall. This is really just another page of history, isn't it? Will this be the end of our civilization? (shrugs) ... Turn the page.
 You say that with remarkable assuredness.
 (keys insignia) On my way, Lieutenant.
 Status of shields.
 (to comm) Mister La Forge, I may have to take us out of the nebula... I'll need all the power you can give me.
 Acknowledged.
 Take us out of here, Number One...
 Ready phasers... load forward torpedo bays...
 Fire at will. Continue rotating shield frequ...
 I have nothing to say to you, and I will resist you with my last ounce of strength.
 Impossible. My culture is based on freedom and self-determination.
 We would rather die.
 What is it you wish of me?
 I am Locutus of Borg. Resistance is futile. Your life as it has been is over. From this time forward, you will service... us.
 Sleep.
 Sleep.
 Sleep. Data.
 Almost human. (smiles slightly) With a bit of a headache...
 Everything. (beat) Including some brilliantly unorthodox strategy by a former first officer of mine.
 Have they estimated the time for repairs... ?
 Come.
 Permission granted. They picked a fine officer for the task force, Commander.
 Make it so, Number One.
 Captain's log, Stardate 44085.7. We have moved into Sector Two-One-Nine-Four-Seven in response to a distress call from a Talarian observation craft. The alien vessel appears adrift, and our initial probe has detected a life-threatening radiation leak within its propulsion system.
 Maintain an open channel.
 (nods) ... and issue a general distress call, yes, I know...
 Position?
 Counselor?
 Number One, assemble the rest of your away team and prepare for immediate rescue operations.
 Proceed with the evacuation, Number One.
 Captain's log, supplemental: We have completed emergency evacuation of four Talarians -- and one human. How this young man found himself in the custody of these aliens remains a mystery.
 May I have your attention, please?
 Please -- may I have your attention?
 Stop that immediately!
 Well. That's better. Now, what's your name, young man?
 What?
 Isn't it possible he was injured prior to his captivity?
 (frowns) But if they have... abused the boy... why would he devoutly wish to return to them?
 Now what?
 Jono -- !
 She was trying to help you!
 Jono -- I want you to stop this immediately!
 That's better. Now, if we're to accomplish anything --
 Go ahead.
 Very well. Doctor, Counselor... (join me)
 ... as in Admiral Rossa, Data?
 I remember. There were no survivors.
 (nods) Tragedy, it seems, follows the Rossa Family... the Admiral has lost both her sons...
 I agree. Please take whatever means you need to accomplish that, Counselor.
 Why not?
 (over my dead body) Oh, no, Counselor! I don't think so. He needs someone who is -- trained in these things.
 Jono... why do you make that noise?
 Is it not also the custom of your people to listen to the wishes of their Captain?
 Then, as Captain of the Starship Enterprise, I ask you not to make that sound.
 Good. Well. Now that we have that cleared up... (tries to look cheerful) Let's... get acquainted, shall we?
 (looking around) What do you think of your quarters? I know it's a bit -- sterile. But if there's anything you'd like... pictures, perhaps, or games...
 Not at all. I thought you would be comfortable here --
 (temporizing) We will rendezvous with the warship Q'maire at Oh-seven-forty. We are preparing to transfer the Talarians to Captain Endar.
 We will... discuss... your situation with Captain Endar.
 Well, we can find other quarters.
 Ah. Yes, well... that won't work, here.
 I'm sure you'll see... there's nothing here that would appeal to a young person.
 Put that down, please.
 Yes. Put it back where you got it.
 Well. Here we are, eh, Jono?
 I notice you haven't taken off your gloves...
 Why not?
 Jono... your Captain, Endar? Has he ever hurt you? (off Jono) Inflicted pain?
 Then he has.
 Is that what they are? Tests of pain?
 It's true I don't fully understand Talarians. But... you are not Talarian.
 Come.
 Ah, yes, Counselor. Please -- sit down.
 You may not be aware of this, but I have never been particularly comfortable around children.
 For some reason, they just don't seem to respond to me.
 Frankly, I think my time is best served carrying out the duties and responsibilities of a Starfleet Captain.
 All right, Counselor... I just don't think I'm the right person for this job.
 I'm not cringing... I am simply acknowledging my limitations.
 No, but I don't think that has anything to do with anything... (beat, pondering) Perhaps it's because... no, this is foolish. What does it matter?
 Just that... ever since I was a child... I knew exactly what I wanted -- to be a member of Starfleet. Nothing else mattered to me. Virtually my entire youth was spent pursuing that goal. In fact... (beat) I think... that I may have skipped my childhood.
 And... that's what I'm going to have to do?
 Computer, turn off that noise!
 Computer, what was that?
 Jono? Where are you?
 Yes, I certainly did, and I expect it to stay turned off. Jono, would you come down from there?
 (indicating room) I see you've made yourself at home.
 Right... Jono, I want to show you something.
 Those are Connor and Moira Rossa -- your parents. That baby is you... Jeremiah Rossa.
 You were born Jeremiah, on Galen Four. Your colony was destroyed, later, during a border skirmish.
 You knew how to laugh once.
 Do you remember any of that? Your parents, your home?
 Jono, your parents were killed by Talarians...
 What is it, Number One?
 (warning hand) You stay put. (to Riker) I'm on my way.
 Status, Mister Data.
 Are its weapons systems active?
 On screen.
 Captain Jean-Luc Picard of the Federation Starship Enterprise. We have rescued four crew members from your observation craft. They have received medical attention and are ready for transport.
 One moment, Captain. We have also discovered a human among your crew.
 Actually, his name is Jeremiah -- Jeremiah Rossa.
 He was not wounded in the mishap...
 But as a representative of the Federation I demand an explanation. Why has this child been held in your custody all these years?
 Captain's log, supplemental: Endar's claim that Jeremiah Rossa is his son is clearly unacceptable.
 However, to avoid escalating tensions, I have extended an invitation to the Talarian leader to come aboard the Enterprise so that we may address the issue face-to-face.
 Among them Connor and Moira Rossa.
 And so, you -- kidnapped him.
 You should have notified Federation authorities. To conceal him was a clear violation of our agreement.
 What... tradition... is it that empowered you to capture a helpless child?
 (weighing this) I understand your tradition, Endar. May I ask... does it extend also to brutalizing the surrogate son?
 Our medical officer found evidence of injuries so severe that they might even be considered torture...
 Then explain the fractured ribs! The concussion... the broken arm...
 Doesn't he deserve to become more than that?
 His heritage is human, Endar.
 (an inner decision made) Captain Endar, while on board, you are welcome to supervise the return of your crew. But I cannot allow Jeremiah Rossa to be returned to your custody. His true family is waiting for him on Earth.
 I have already reported our position and the nature of this violation to Starfleet.
 (amazed) Are you saying you would be willing to go to war over the boy?
 We have been at peace for years. Let us not rush headlong toward war.
 Then you think it would be unwise to let Endar see Jono.
 (a beat) I'm not convinced he was abused, Doctor. I've talked to the man, and if I am any judge of character... I'd say he deeply cares about the boy's welfare.
 Yes... There is also something else we should keep in mind. We are deep in Talarian territory. A semblance of diplomacy is called for. (beat) I shall allow the visit.
 Agreed.
 Their offensive potential?
 The last thing I want is to be forced into destroying one of their ships.
 (somber) The lines are being drawn... all this for a chosen son.
 There must be a way to avoid this...
 (with hope) Endar's entire claim on Jono is based on Talarian custom... he'd have a hard time backing away from it now...
 On screen.
 Have the boy brought to my Ready Room.
 Yes.
 She is an Admiral.
 Yes.
 Jono...
 Jono -- let me show you what I do when I get those feelings.
 (demonstrating) I serve from here... like this... (serves) And you must hit it back before it bounces twice. Let's try it.
 Not bad.
 I can believe it. Well, shall we give this a try?
 Jono? You all right?
 Jono -- what is it?!
 It is part of being human, Jono. But as deeply as you can feel hurt -- you can also feel joy.
 Jono -- are you tired?
 He gave me quite a game for his first time out.
 I'm sure you do. sit down, Jono. What would you like?
 Look at him. He's like a different person.
 And half an hour ago he was crying in my arms like a baby.
 Then it wasn't a dream...
 Where is the boy now?
 I want to see him. Here, now.
 Jono... why did you do it?
 I think it does. It matters to me.
 You think you are to be killed?
 Jono, you aren't going to die at my hands or anyone else's.
 What I want to know is why? You seemed so happy just a few hours ago...
 One moment, Captain...
 Captain Endar, last night Jono attacked me with a dagger.
 (silencing hand) There was a crime committed on board this ship... but it was not Jono's -- it was mine.
 (continuing) When we found Jono, it seemed so clear what had to be done. We knew if he could only be persuaded to make the decision to stay... you would most likely let him. So with the best of intentions, we tried to convince him... and, in so doing, thoroughly failed to listen... to his feelings, his needs.
 (continuing) That was the crime, and it has taken a huge toll on a strong and noble young man. It must be rectified.
 (continuing) Jono will return home -- to the only home he has ever known. To the father that he loves. To you, Endar.
 Please transmit coordinates for his immediate transport.
 Goodbye, Jono.
 Captain's log, Stardate 44143.7. Due to a medical emergency, we have been forced to cut short a two-day liberty on Ogus Two and set course for Starbase Four-One-Six.
 (continuing) It seems a young man's practical joke has come dangerously close to a lethal conclusion.
 FOLLOW Riker and Troi, as they ENTER from the Observation Lounge and cross to the Command Center. DATA descends the ramp toward Ops. / 
 Go ahead, Commander.
 Very good, Geordi. Let me know if you...
 (to Riker) What's going on?
 (to Data, calmly) Commander...
 Turbolifts Three and Four, gentlemen. (to com) Geordi, transfer helm to Engineering.
 (to Geordi) It seems we have more than one problem. Bring the Enterprise to a full stop, Commander.
 I ordered all helm control transferred down here, damn it!
 (putting it all together) Computer, locate Lieutenant Commander Data.
 Number One, take a security team up to Deck Two. See if you can break through from below.
 Picard to bridge. Commander Data do you hear me?
 I repeat.   Data, do you hear...
 Commander La Forge, prepare for saucer separation.
 I'm aware of the risks, Ensign. (to Geordi) When the umbilical splits, we should regain primary control... do you agree?
 (to Worf) . Be prepared to sweep back and pull it in with a tractor beam.
 (to Geordi) Initiate auto sequence.
 Computer, recognize Jean-Luc Picard Alpha Two priority and re-establish separation procedures immediately.
 And just what location are they accepted from?
 (disgusted) It seems Mister Data has acquired them, as well.
 (keys insignia) Chief O'Brien.
 You had better disable the site- to-site transport function. When we get to wherever we're going, I don't want him beaming off the bridge.
 (keys insignia) Doctor Crusher.
 Is your quarantine intact, Doctor?
 The boy?
 It seems, Doctor, that Mister Data has other plans for the Enterprise right now.
 (to Wesley) Have you tried tracing back navigation inputs?
 Go ahead, Chief.
 What now?
 How much further can you safely disable the ransporters, Mister O'Brien?
 (to Worf) I want security teams along the main passageways and in every transporter oom, Lieutenant. See if the computer would be good enough to give you the specific stun setting to disable Mister Data.
 Computer, estimate time from this location to Starbase Four-One-Six at warp nine.
 You have access to it?
 Determine the absolute minimum field energy that Doctor Crusher needs... and use the rest to get me onto my bridge.
 We're on our way, Lieutenant.
 Let's hope.
 (to Computer) Computer, this is Captain Picard. Return all command functions to stations.
 (furious) Security code!?
 That's one human who's got the answers to a lot of questions.
 What is it?
 The code, Mister La Forge?
 I want something that will really help.
 Try, Mister La Forge.
 They're sure this is going to work?
 And they can insert them into the recall loop?
 (to Riker) Bring him home, Number One.
 (cont'd) Energize.
 Captain's Log, Stardate 44149.1. We have been at Starbase Four-One-Six for three days. Young Willie Potts is responding well to treatment and has been returned to the Enterprise.
 The transfer went well?
 Captain's Log: Stardate 44009.3
 (continuing) The Enterprise remains docked at McKinley Station, undergoing a major overhaul and refit. I am confident that the ship... and crew... will soon be ready to return to service.
 belongings into a small rucksack.
 (responding) France. Labarre, my home village...
 First time in almost twenty years...
 (Don't... ) Counselor...
 It's Earth... it's home... do I need another reason?
 Counselor, your help has been invaluable during my recovery. I'm better... the injuries have healed...
 (insisting) The nightmares have ended. All I need is a little time to myself.
 If you wish to believe my going home is a direct result of being held captive by the Borg, be my guest...
 I hate it when you do that.
 (softly, finishing the thought) And what better place to find oneself than on the streets of one's home village.
 All right... whoever's there... I can hear you...
 Good lord, a highwayman.
 A highwayman is a robber who attacks travelers, but to my knowledge, none have been reported in this vicinity for centuries.
 I am much relieved, sir.
 Then, you have the advantage.
 Then you must be my uncle Rene.
 Too bad. I rather enjoyed the idea.
 Well, Starfleet keeps me very busy...
 I'm sure you misunderstood...
 Ah well, Robert and I... we... (beat) Perhaps it's time to change all that.
 Arrogant...
 (overlapping) Let's talk about it later, shall we?
 Marie...
 (nods) Just fine.
 I was just thinking that I really might be imposing... I could easily stay in the village...
 No. In fact, the amazing thing is how little it has changed. Everything is exactly as I remember it... the hills, the house, every rock and stone looks untouched by the passage of time.
 As it was to our father.
 (grins) Even you, Uncle... you look so much like Robert when he was your age... (and this is more to himself) ... I half expect to see myself as a boy run out the door to play...
 (dry) Yes. Rene already told me.
 Where is he?
 Hello, Robert.
 No... I decided to walk. (long beat) I met Marie and Rene.
 It's... good to see you.
 Is he still trying to raise the ocean floor?
 Oh, it's really quite exciting actually... when you understand the potential of exploring a new world on our own planet...
 A parade... ?
 No... no...
 (a little sharp) No. I don't. I just want... to rest and spend some time with my family.
 Thank-you.
 (sampling the wine) Is this the forty-six?
 Not at all. I believe synthehol heightens one's appreciation for the genuine article.
 Leave it to Robert to find the best chef in France and marry her...
 I can remember the same "discussions" between mother and father...
 I don't see that you have to lose anything... just by adding a convenience...
 I was astonished to see it here...
 Good for you, uncle. You know what? I wrote a report about starships when I was about your age...
 I don't recall...
 No, I don't think so.
 I am not encouraging anything... but if you weren't so narrow-minded, if you allowed him to see the real world...
 Two men. Robert's. And my father's.
 No, I was interested, Louis. And I was proud that my family helped to preserve the traditions. But I did not feel bound by those traditions... (beat) ... as they seemed to be.
 There should be room for both in this life.
 And you, old rascal, you've made quite a shift toward the future yourself...
 (laughs) You should have listened to me from the beginning.
 And broken your leg!
 I hear you've been promoted to supervisor of the Atlantis project...
 It's certainly exciting work. I've kept up with it in the journals...
 There's only one thing I don't understand... (off Louis' reaction) It's just that you were such a desperately poor swimmer... thinking of you working on the ocean floor...
 Seriously, how do you plan to accelerate the buildup on the underside of the mantle without increasing stress on the tectonic plates?
 The Enterprise used harmonic resonators to relieve tectonic pressures on Drema Four... it's obviously not exactly the same problem but...
 No, I'd never leave Starfleet.
 (beat) All right.
 Actually... I seem to have made a disturbing discovery...
 Louis mentioned the Atlantis project needed a director... and I actually found myself thinking about it.
 Do you think so?
 Marie, I spent my youth doing everything I could to get away from home...
 I can't argue with that.
 Well, I already like his choice of wives. I haven't thanked you for your correspondence, it made me feel like part of the family.
 Well, there's really nothing to talk about...
 I've just really had a chance to glance at them... I have a few ideas but...
 A meeting... ?
 Preliminary to what?
 I never said there was a prospect...
 Fine. Good. I'll listen to them.
 That is so.
 What's that?
 I have nothing but pity for those who abuse any substance.
 Yes.
 Is that "brotherly" concern?
 You know what happened.
 I don't want to do this with you...
 I'm tired of fighting with you, Robert...
 That's right.
 I am not a hero...
 That isn't true.
 I've never sought recognition...
 Were you so jealous?
 (scorn) A right...
 Why didn't you break a few rules?
 You were a bully...
 Try it again.
 You were asking for it, you know.
 You don't know, Robert. You don't know. They took everything I was. They used me to kill and destroy. And I could not stop them. I should have been able to stop them.
 I tried... I tried... so hard... but I just wasn't strong enough. Not good enough. I should have been able to stop them. I should have been able to...
 You know, I think you were right. (off Robert's look) Maybe I did come back so you'd look after me.
 It's entirely my fault, Marie...
 We both fell together...
 He'd probably send us to bed without our supper.
 Perhaps it was, Marie. Perhaps it was. (beat) I'll contact Louis and cancel the meeting with the Board of Governors. It's time for me to be going...
 The ship will be ready to leave orbit soon... and I belong on board. (beat, then to Robert) If I ever doubt that again... I know where to come.
 I'm sorry. I must.
 Take care, Uncle.
 (gently) There's plenty of time for that... keep your mind open... you may decide to do something else as you get older. (tinge of irony) Try not to be so... narrow-minded.
 Thank you, Lieutenant.
 Delighted.
 You got the full tour, I trust...
 Worf and Beverly.
 (to Beverly) Could your friend have returned to the starbase without telling you? An emergency of some sort?
 By all means check the trace log. But even if the results are negative, contact Starbase Command. We should leave nothing to chance.
 Doctor, one moment please. (she turns back) I'm sure you are aware of procedures involving passengers.
 I was not informed either.
 I never received it.
 Computer, search passenger requests. Doctor Dalen Quaice. (MORE)
 Point of embarkation: Starbase One-Three-Three.
 Then it must have been intercepted before it reached me.
 Doctor Quaice had been stationed at the starbase for some time?
 It might be prudent to find out if he'd acquired any enemies there.
 Very good, Number One. Mister Data?
 I thought he was stationed there for six years.
 Mister Worf?
 Then it appears, for reasons unknown, someone has gone to great pains to erase all traces of this man.
 Did they come aboard with Doctor Quaice?
 As O'Brien didn't remember Doctor Quaice... ?
 Go ahead, Ensign.
 On my way.
 (to Riker) Number One, any progress?
 (to Worf) Check shield and hull integrity for any sign of intruders...
 (interrupting) Then give me a Level One diagnostic of all onboard sensors, and run a manual sweep for any anomalous airborne or electromagnetic readings. I want some answers.
 (nods) I've read your reports.
 Are you suggesting this bubble could have made Doctor Quaice disappear?
 Was Doctor Quaice in Engineering during your experiment?
 And this bubble never expanded beyond Engineering?
 Then how could it have trapped Doctor Quaice or the others?
 And I doubt warp bubbles could alter computer records, or erase memories. (beat) Keep at it, Ensign, Mister La Forge. It's the only working theory we have for now.
 Has something else happened?
 Doctor, may I see you in my Ready Room?
 Beverly, you're saying this ship has lost nearly eight hundred of its personnel... ?
 None of the scans reveal any anomalies... there is no sign of an intruder... Wesley's experiment clearly did not have the scope to affect an entire starship...
 I have no choice but to believe you. The safety of my crew is at stake. But I want to be sure...
 Did you find anything that might suggest why you're apparently the only one among us unaffected by this... phenomenon?
 It wouldn't do any harm.
 (keys insignia) Mister Riker, set a course to return to Starbase One-Three-Three immediately.
 Your word has always been good enough for me.
 Is there any possible connection to Mister Crusher's experiment... could this warp bubble be... floating around the ship perhaps...
 (enough) Thank you, Mister Data.
 Have security confine all nonessential personnel to their quarters. Computer, Red Alert.
 (gives her a blank stare) Whom did you say?
 (anger growing) Doctor, I believe I have been more than fair. I have done everything I can to substantiate your... your perceptions --
 I cannot find any evidence...
 ... Beverly, we'll be arriving at Starbase One-Three-Three in a few hours...
 Perhaps you should confine yourself to Sickbay until we arrive...
 We've never needed a crew before.
 You have my word... as soon as we return to the starbase, I'll make every effort to find him.
 How?
 Until I disappear.
 Very well. Computer, continuous scan: Captain Jean-Luc Picard vital signs. Audible readout. Begin now.
 Vividly. But if I have forgotten my closest friends and comrades, as you say, I deserved every word.
 Captain's log, Stardate 44162.5. Two attempts to retrieve Doctor Crusher have failed. And now the Traveler, a mysterious visitor from our past, has reappeared.
 (impatient) Is she alive?
 Captain's log, stardate 44162.8. At the direction of the Traveler, the Enterprise is returning to Starbase One-Three-Three and the precise position where the subspace bubble was formed.
 Slow to ten meters per second.
 I'll be in Engineering.
 (surprised) One thousand fourteen, including your guest, Doctor Quaice.
 Picard to Riker.
 We've received a distress call. Changing course to intercept...
 Captain's log, stardate 44215.2. The Enterprise has bypassed its scheduled archaelogical survey of Camus Two in response to a distress call from a Federation freighter. The Arcos has assumed an emergency orbit around Turkana Four, birthplace of our late comrade Tasha Yar.
 A supernumerary is at the Conn.
 Engine status.
 Let's hear it.
 Warp nine-point-three, Ensign.
 How much time?
 Go to warp nine-point-six.
 (to com) Mister O'Brien, prepare to lock onto the two crewmen.
 Drop to impulse.
 It could have been damaged by the explosion. They may have been incapable of maintaining orbit.
 Hail the colony.
 Ready your away team, Number One.
 Captain's log, supplemental. We are in orbit above Turkana Four, an Earth colony that severed relations with the Federation nearly fifteen years ago. I am concerned about sending an away team, but if we are to discover the fate of the two missing Federation crewmen, I see no alternative.
 Why?
 "Coalition", "Alliance" -- it all sounds so reasonable. But you've described the behavior of urban street thugs. We certainly won't trade weapons for the crewmen. (beat) How do you suggest we deal with them?
 (nods in agreement) For now, Hayne's Coalition is our only safe access to the colony. Let's keep the door open and see where it leads.
 (surprised) On screen.
 (to Hayne) I'm Captain Jean-Luc Picard.
 With nothing from us in return?
 What do you propose?
 One moment.
 Reactions?
 Counsellor?
 Regardless, this is an option we cannot neglect. We'll continue on other fronts as they present themselves. For now, let's see what she has to say.
 I've decided to accept your proposal.
 We have considered that possibility.
 Please. Sit down.
 Perhaps it would help if you gave us some idea of what we're dealing with on Turkana Four. Our last information describes a colony in complete disarray.
 Apparently, that part of the plan didn't succeed very well.
 On screen.
 Unfortunately, we don't know where the escape pod is.
 Come.
 (continuing) How is she?
 Doctor Crusher just called me with the results of her DNA comparison. Ishara is Tasha's sister.
 (a beat) You took some unnecessary personal risks, Number One.
 That's an emotional response, Will. We can't afford that.
 Commander...
 Well done.
 I wanted to thank you personally for what you did for us down at the colony. It was... more than I expected.
 Let me tell you about your sister. The first time I met Tasha Yar, she was making her way through a Carnelian mine field to reach a wounded colonist.
 (continuing) Her ship had responded to their distress call, as had mine. When it was all over, I requested that Tasha be assigned to the Enterprise. (smiling) Her ship's captain owed me a favor.
 (continuing) In the months that followed, Tasha never once failed to put the safety of the crew before her own. (beat) She died doing the same.
 I'm sorry you never knew the woman Tasha became. I think you might have been proud of her. (MORE)
 (beat) And she of you.
 Very good. You may inform Doctor Crusher.
 Does she understand the magnitude of these decisions?
 Her courage certainly speaks in her favor. But Ishara's personal history concerns me.
 Tasha never joined one of these gangs. Doesn't that suggest a fundamental difference between the two of them?
 Are you suggesting we deny her an escape from this environment, Counselor?
 Ultimately, it is her decision to make, not ours... (beat) Certainly nothing would please me more than to see another officer named Yar in the service of Starfleet... Mister Data, proceed with the rescue as discussed...
 Captain's log, stardate 44225.3. Doctor Crusher has removed Ishara's magnetic implant, enabling the young woman to guide our rescue attempt.
 (continuing) Without my intending it, she has virtually become an active member of the crew.
 Picard to Riker. Is your away team ready?
 Status, Mister La Forge.
 How far must we penetrate to safely allow transporter function?
 Fire phasers.
 Cease fire.
 (to com) Picard to O'Brien, Energize.
 Your strategy failed.
 Commander Data, escort Ishara to the transporter toom.
 Close the channel.
 I understand your feelings, Number One. I share them. But perhaps the fault lies in ourselves. We were so eager to embrace her. Each of us, myself included, wanted to see something of Tasha in her sister. We saw more than what was there.
 Captain's Log: Stardate 44246.3 We are investigating radiation anomalies reported in the Gamma Arigulon system by the starship LaSalle. Preliminary readings are inconclusive.
 stations.
 Prepare two class one probes.
 Initiate launch sequence.
 Belay that order, Mister Data.
 On screen.
 Open channel.
 (surprised) Ambassador K'Ehleyr... This is an unexpected pleasure.
 How may we be of assistance, Ambassador?
 Granted.
 Lieutenant, please receive our guest.
 May I ask your reason?
 (firm) You are a member of this crew, Lieutenant... and I will not have you go into hiding whenever a Klingon ship uncloaks.
 Do you believe there is a threat to the Federation in this... struggle?
 I heard you were ill.
 If the Enterprise medical facility...
 What do you want of me?
 I will?
 K'mpec. You can't be serious. A Federation officer has no business...
 On the contrary, I think it is very different. And I must respectfully decline.
 (angry) You had no right to involve me without my permission.
 This is not a case of simple mediation... you are asking me to choose the next leader of the Klingon Empire.
 But you've just said there are only two challengers arriving. What is the point?
 (dry) Interesting? Yes, I would say that, since he conspired to strip Worf of his good name and tried to have me killed...
 Very well. I accept.
 Captain's log: supplemental. K'mpec, who ruled the Klingon Empire longer than anyone in history, is dead. We await the arrival of Duras and Gowron... rivals for the leadership of the High Council.
 Open a channel, Mister Data.
 On screen.
 In good time, Duras.
 (coolly) The Sonchi ceremony will take place in one hour aboard K'mpec's ship.
 There is no delay. It is the time I have chosen.
 (will not be pushed) Picard... out.
 (to Data) Contact Gowron's ship, tell him to meet us aboard K'mpec's vessel. Ambassador, I'll meet you in Transporter Room Six in an hour. We'll begin the ceremony a little late. (moves to Ready Room) Mister Worf.
 Worf, I know the next couple of days will be difficult for you...
 (beat) I want you to know I am aware of your... discomfort.
 Ambassador K'ehleyr will be preparing me for my role in the rite of succession. But I have no doubt that I will be calling upon you for assistance as well, Lieutenant.
 Granted.
 He has a legal claim, Worf. Your personal feelings toward him...
 Klingon tradition may blame the son for the father's sins. I cannot, Worf. Treason was his father's disgrace. Duras' crime was to put that blame on your father... I will not forget that. But you should not forget that you chose to accept the consequences of that lie.
 The issue now is whether or not he killed K'mpec.
 He was murdered... poisoned.
 K'mpec believed the assassin to be either Duras or Gowron.
 (with distaste) I hope this is brief.
 Qab... jIH... nagil (Face me if you dare!)
 We will proceed according to the traditions and precedents set down in Klingon law.
 We will reconvene on the Enterprise within---
 (frustrated) We haven't completed our analysis of the bomb debris... and Doctor Crusher is still studying the remains of the two men killed in the explosion. (beat) We need more time.
 Is there some way of stretching out the formalities once they arrive?
 You said "modern Rite"... how was the ritual performed in the past?
 Can the old form still be used?
 I'm sorry... but I cannot discuss it.
 mev yap! (Stop!)
 (firm) Sit down.
 (continuing) We will begin the ja'chuq.
 I choose to respect the ancient ritual. Each of you must prove your worthiness to lead the High Council.
 How could Romulans have planted a bomb aboard a Klingon attack cruiser?
 Perhaps Duras or Gowron wishes to improve that relationship.
 Indeed. (beat) It would put the Federation in a very uncomfortable position.
 (reacts) But does that suggest a Romulan connection?
 We have had prior dealings with Duras that showed him to be... untrustworthy.
 No.
 Mister Worf, we now have a conspiracy on our hands that could be a direct threat to the security of the Federation.
 As Chief Security Officer, you will accompany me to the next transition proceeding.
 (nods, a beat) Yes. It will.
 Both your claims have been properly made and recorded. We are ready for the final phase of the ja'chuq. There will be a recess while I review your petitions.
 (beat) I know that you're as concerned as I am about the explosion aboard K'mpec's ship. I assume both of your investigations are continuing...
 That's very interesting... because our analysis turned up some startling results. (keying insignia) Will you join us?
 (final) It is my prerogative to investigate anything relevant to the Rite of Succession. Lieutenant Worf is my chief of security. His presence is required.
 I will determine how we proceed. If you wish to withdraw from the ja'chuq... that is your option.
 (nods) A Romulan device.
 Lieutenant, please be sure to send a complete record of our findings to both vessels... and to the High Council. (beat) We are adjourned.
 Where's Worf?
 Where is he?
 Lieutenant, you are a fine officer... your service aboard this ship has been exemplary... (beat) Until now.
 The High Council seems to agree with you. They consider the matter to be closed. (beat) I do not.
 The Enterprise crew currently includes representatives from thirteen planets, Mister Worf. They each have their individual beliefs and values and I respect them all. But every member of the crew has chosen to serve Starfleet. If anyone cannot perform his duties because of the demands of his society, he must resign.
 Do you wish to resign, Lieutenant?
 I would hope you would not throw away a promising career.
 (softer) I understand your pain... we all felt very close to K'Ehleyr. (long beat) A reprimand will be on your record. Dismissed.
 Worf...
 Isn't it time for the truth about your father's innocence to be told? After all, the reasons you accepted this dishonor were to protect the name of Duras, and hold the Empire together. Now that he's died in disgrace... where is the honor in further silence?
 Captain's Log, Stardate 44286.5. The Enterprise is conducting a security survey of the Onias Sector near the Neutral Zone. Despite being close to Romulan territory, our mission has been quiet and uneventful.
 Mister Data, we'd better hurry or we'll miss Commander Riker's party.
 We had better take a look, Mister Data.
 Source?
 Or perhaps the rumors of a secret Romulan base in this sector are true.
 (to com) Picard to Commander Riker.
 (continuing) I apologize for interrupting your celebration, but I need an Away Team.
 I suppose you'll just have to go down there and find out.
 (half apologetic) Number One... Happy Birthday.
 (breaking up, through static) Bridge to Riker. Report. Please acknowledge.
 And we are having similar difficulties reading you, Number One. I am advising you...
 ... and your team to transport up... At once...
 Transporter Room... What's happening? Report!
 Will!
 Not surprising. Altarian Viruses can be a nasty business.
 (interrupting) We can discuss this... after we transport over. Picard out.
 Captain Riker... it's good to see you have recovered.
 How much?
 To lose sixteen years...
 (continuing) ... that is almost beyond belief.
 And it couldn't have happened at a worse time. A few more days of relatively simple negotiations, and the treaty will be signed.
 Sorry. I'll start at the beginning, which was four years ago. A Romulan battle cruiser strayed into Federation space. Its warp coils had collapsed, and its life support was failing.
 This impressed the Romulans, to say the least. After years of distrust and conflict, they started to talk. You have been our key spokesman...
 ... in securing an alliance with the Romulans.
 The preliminaries are over. All we need do now is escort the Romulan Ambassador to the final session.
 Will... you are of sound mind and body. If you were properly briefed, you could still fulfill your duties.
 I know this has all been... a terrible shock... but we do need you.
 (gently) I appreciate your candor and your concern. But despite your... affliction... there is still no one better equipped to deal with these Romulans than you.
 (relieved) As soon as the Ambassador transports over from the Decius. I'll make the arrangements. (intently) We will get through this. As we have many times before.
 Picard to Captain Riker. The Romulan Ambassador is ready to transport over from the Decius.
 (gently) Troi tells me you met Jean-Luc. How is my namesake holding up to all this?
 Just follow my lead with the Ambassador. You'll do fine.
 Ambassador Tomalak... Welcome aboard the Enterprise.
 I agree, Ambassador. All of the difficult issues have been resolved.
 But we have come to an agreement both sides can live with. Thanks largely to Captain Riker.
 (smoothly) I assure you Captain Riker is quite well. He's looking forward to attending the final negotiations... as planned.
 I trust the process we have built with the Romulans over the past four years. They have nothing to gain by betrayal.
 Pardon my bluntness, Captain, but your information is out of date. The strategic importance of Outpost Twenty-Three is minimal. And has been for years.
 Captain Riker, this is no way to act in front of Ambassador...
 What did you say?
 (to com) Picard to Riker... can you read me?
 Are you all right?
 We beamed them up an hour ago... They're fine.
 But we lost you in mid-transport. Where have you been? What is going on down there?
 Captain's log, stardate 44307.3. I am preparing to leave by shuttlecraft for Pentarus Five, where I have been asked to mediate a dispute among the salenite miners -- a contentious group unfortunately prone to violence.
 ALLENBY at their positions.
 At the same time, I must deal with a situation of a far more personal nature.
 Ensign, I summoned you almost ten minutes ago!
 Excuses, Mister Crusher?
 Because I assure you that will not go over well at Starfleet Academy.
 I just got the message from Admiral Nsomeka. She expects you to report in two weeks.
 A position has opened up in this year's class. You'll have to work overtime to catch up, but I have assured the Commander that you will be capable of that. Please don't make a liar of me.
 And as your final mission aboard the Enterprise... I'd like you to accompany me to Pentarus while I try to sort things out with the miners.
 Mister Riker tells me you've been studying the effects of outpost judiciary decisions on Federation Law. What better way to get first-hand experience?
 On screen.
 (to Worf) Open channel. (to screen) I am Captain Jean-Luc Picard of the Federation Starship Enterprise.
 Mister Data, are we close enough for a scan?
 Very well. Chairman Songi, we will proceed immediately to your planet.
 Mister Riker, take the Enterprise and investigate the problem. Ensign Crusher and I will proceed to Pentarus Five. (to Wes) The miners have sent a shuttle. We'll depart in ten minutes.
 Ah -- Captain. Good to meet you.
 It seems a very -- sturdy -- craft.
 I'll let Ensign Crusher perform that task. I need to study up on Regalian law.
 Is your navigational system functioning?
 Estimated position... ?
 Mister Crusher, scan for a class M environment...
 Life forms indicated?
 Ensign, reconfigure the working thrusters to manual inputs.
 Beginning braking maneuver.
 Let's salvage what we can. (glancing upward) The first thing we'll need is shelter from the sun. In this heat, the shuttle will act like an oven.
 We'll have to check the craft for something to protect our heads and eyes... and Captain, please recover your medical supplies... food and water rations...
 But... food and water?
 Surely... you have emergency supplies.
 Are you telling me... that we have no water?
 Mister Crusher, any luck with that tricorder?
 Excellent. Now -- (scanning the distance) Our communicators may not be able to get a signal through this strong a magnetic field... so I've fashioned an arrow. If a search party finds the wreckage, they'll know we've headed for those mountains.
 We can't survive out here in the sun. (MORE)
 Where there are mountains, there is shelter.
 (interrupting) Thank you, Ensign, that's enough.
 Captain Dirgo, you're an able pilot and I welcome your input. Do you feel there's an alternative we're overlooking?
 Very well. I suggest a steady pace, but not a brisk one. We need to ration our energy. Try to breathe through your nose, it will help prevent dehydration. I'll lead... Captain Dirgo, will you bring up the rear?
 Mister Crusher?
 Energy reading? What kind?
 Ensign, are you suggesting this energy is not naturally occurring?
 A life form?
 We can't go back... and we can't stay here. We have to keep going to the mountains. No matter what's waiting there.
 Not necessarily... they could have been created by volcanic activity -- lava flows. (turns from wall) These walls are dry... Mister Crusher, do you get any moisture reading?
 Alcohol.
 This won't quench your thirst... it will only make it worse.
 I'm not going to let you waste this. It's more valuable to us as a coolant or a disinfectant.
 Mister Crusher, stow this with the medical supplies and keep your eye on it.
 Now we're going to explore this cave. Mister Crusher, look for any indication of water, no matter how faint. Captain Dirgo -- will you lead the way?
 Mister Crusher... what was that?
 Put there to protect the water.
 I think it might be wiser if...
 (warning) Dirgo...
 Stop firing!
 Ensign... how bad is it?
 (weakly) Good work... I'm going to be fine in a moment... just need to catch my breath...
 Mister Dirgo -- I'd appreciate it if you didn't bury me before I'm gone.
 The trouble is... he may be right.
 (gently) For a moment... I saw your father's face in yours...
 He wouldn't give up, either... even when things looked bleakest, even on that terrible afternoon...
 Strange, I always remember it as night. Maybe... sudden, unnecessary death ought to happen at night... not on a bright cloudless afternoon...
 Wesley... you're going to have to keep a rein on Dirgo... he's willful, stubborn... that could be dangerous...
 (sharply) Listen to me. I have no feeling in my right leg. My vision is blurred... I'm going to get worse, not better. I won't be able to help you, Wesley. You'll have to stand up to him on your own.
 Good man...
 Cold...
 ... don't seem to be much good to you, Wesley...
 I'm... trying...
 (with great effort) ... it's my fault you're here... I shouldn't have asked you...
 ... I was selfish... knew I might not see you again... forgive me...
 Ensign... where are we?
 ... need water...
 Yes... I remember...
 Wesley... I may not make it...
 Listen to me...
 So much I've wanted to tell you. (beat) At the Academy, there is someone... who meant a great deal to me... he has been there "forever"... you must get to know him... his name is Boothby... tell him we were friends...
 When I was there... he helped me... Listen to him...
 He's the groundskeeper. One of the wisest men I ever knew... (beat) I envy you, Wesley... it is just the beginning of the adventure for you.
 Go on, get the water, stay alive... they'll find you.
 Wesley...
 Always remember... I was... proud of you...
 (weakly) Beverly...
 Mister Crusher...
 A moment...
 I want you all to know...
 (to the others) He saved my life...
 Wesley, know this... you will be missed.
 ALLENBY is at Conn.
 (rising) ... An ancient trail along the Kabul River in the Himalayas... it's a wonderful program... Will, it'll do you good to get a little fresh Holodeck air...
 (teasing) Nonsense. We'll program an appropriately docile steed for you and...
 Of what, Lieutenant?
 Ensign Allenby, full stop. We'll investigate both possibilities.
 Captain's log, stardate 44356.9. Sensor diagnostic has been completed and indicates that all systems are normal. There remains no explanation for the images which appeared in our path.
 Prepare to resume course to T'lli Beta, Ensign. Mister Data, what velocity will put us back on schedule?
 Ensign, set course and stand ready at warp six.
 Engage.
 (nods) Back to full stop, Ensign.
 Damage?
 Picard to La Forge.
 If your engines are functional, we'll attempt to break free.
 Ensign, bring us around ninety degrees to starboard from our current heading...
 One-quarter impulse. Engage.
 One-half impulse.
 Full impulse... rotate heading in five degree increments.
 Ensign.
 Mister Worf, your analysis.
 Can there be an intelligence at work here?
 Counselor, do you sense a lifeform out there?
 It's alright, Counsellor. Perhaps there's nothing out there to sense.
 Are they a lifeform?
 Fascinating. So many questions... how could a two dimensional entity have access to a three dimensional universe... and are they even aware of us... ? (moving back) Number One, if we can put off the T'lli Betans, I'd like to stay and investigate once we're free of this graviton field...
 No one has suggested otherwise, Counselor.
 (continuing) Mister Data, try to isolate any signal patterns from the cluster. Perhaps we'll find a basis for communication. Commander La Forge, we'll attempt your warp jump as soon as you're prepared... (to everyone) That'll be all.
 Counselor --
 That's perfectly understandable...
 (reacts) Resign... ?
 Deanna, I have been fortunate in having had access to your Betazoid abilities. Most starship captains must be content with human counselors. Empathic awareness is not a requirement for the position.
 I'm sure after awhile you'll be able to compensate. They say when one loses a sense, the other senses become stronger to help adjust... a blind man develops better hearing...
 (a beat) There was a teacher of mine at the Academy who had been confined to a wheelchair since birth...
 Counselor Troi has just resigned.
 Go to warp, Geordi.
 Disengage all engines!
 This little nuisance is quickly losing its fascination.
 Follow up on it, Mister Data. Input your observations into the Universal Translator. Perhaps the movements themselves are an attempt at communication.
 Captain's log, Stardate 44359.5. What began as a curious inconvenience has turned into a serious threat. At current speed, the two-dimensional beings and the Enterprise will be drawn into the cosmic string fragment in seven hours.
 Must we destroy them to save ourselves...
 Nevertheless...
 Make it so.
 Mister Worf, proceed.
 (frowns, no choice) Fire another volley directly into their field, Mister Worf.
 Sit down, please.
 (continuing) Our situation has become critical. The cluster is still completely unresponsive. We have not been able to alter its course toward the cosmic string fragment.
 Less than five hours. That's why I've called you.
 All that remains is the possibility of communication. There might be some way to warn them of their impending destruction.
 He has tried every technical means at our disposal to reach them.
 If there is a psychology to these creatures, we must discover it... if there is an explanation to their behavior, we must know it...
 Even in your current condition, you are the most qualified person aboard this ship to assist.
 (continuing) Data is currently in Observation, attempting to formulate a strategy. I'd like you to join him.
 Deanna. We need you.
 Captain's log, supplemental. If our speed and course remain unchanged, in one hour, the Enterprise will be torn apart by the gravitational forces of the cosmic string fragment.
 Vibration. This isn't a violin, Commander.
 (reacts) How much time do we have, Mister Worf?
 Make it so.
 Let's try to turn up the volume. Increase intensity, Mister Data.
 Mister La Forge, take us out of here.
 Excellent work, Mister Data; (nodding to Troi) Counselor.
 Data ENTER.
 Ambassador T'Pel...
 Your service honors us. (gestures) My first officer, Commander William Riker.
 Commander Data, please report to the Bridge.
 Mister Data... I need a tactical projection of possible future Romulan deployments along the Neutral Zone. Access all Federation records on the subject and then report to my Ready Room.
 No.
 (to Riker) Set course one-three-zero mark two-four-six. Warp seven.
 I'm aware of that. Proceed.
 Come.
 Based on your analysis, what is the current Romulan strategy behind the deployment of their ships in this sector?
 Do you predict any change in the near future?
 Are there any indications of a more conciliatory attitude on their part?
 Starfleet Command agrees with you, Ambassador. But I would feel better if you would consent to an escort or...
 (reluctant) Thank you, Mister Data.
 Hold position. Long range scan.
 Yellow Alert.
 Mister Worf, hail the Warbird.
 Set course zero three seven mark zero zero five, warp four. Take us into the Neutral Zone, Ensign.
 Red Alert.
 My crew knows their duty, Ambassador. They will take no provocative action... without my order.
 As are yours, Admiral.
 (quiet) Ambassador, I must once again urge you to reconsider. The Enterprise can accommodate a Romulan delegation without sacrificing security or---
 (to com) Bridge to Transporter Room Three.
 Prepare to beam Ambassador T'Pel to the Romulan ship.
 (to Worf) Maintain a lock on her signal once she's aboard their vessel. At the first sign of trouble I want to be able to bring her back.
 Any prior malfunctions with this Transporter unit?
 (to Geordi) I want that unit pulled and its systems checked again. I also want a level one diagnostic performed on all Transporters.
 To die in a Transporter accident... Hardly a fitting end for one of the Federation's most honored diplomats.
 There's been... an accident. Ambassador T'Pel... was killed in a Transporter malfunction.
 We're investigating that right now. I'm sure that---
 Admiral, I can assure you that the Federation places the highest priority on this mission and its goal.
 You're mistaken. I am ready and willing to discuss the establishment of full diplomatic relations under the same terms as Ambassador T'Pel.
 Set course for Federation territory, warp two.
 (continuing) Engage. (to Data) Mister Data, take charge of the investigation. Study computer logs, sensor information... everything. I refuse to believe this was a simple malfunction.
 So they beamed the Ambassador off our own pad.
 (hits communicator) Mister Worf, where is the Devoras?
 Red Alert. All hands stand to battlestations.
 Lay in an intercept course to the Romulan ship.
 Warp factor eight. Engage.
 Open a channel to the Devoras.
 Go to impulse power.
 On screen.
 (firm) Admiral Mendak, you are holding our Ambassador captive.
 We know about the Transporter 'malfunction' and that you are holding Ambassador T'Pel.
 It is my responsibility to protect the lives of Federation citizens. I will not permit this abduction to succeed..
 (final) I am prepared to take whatever action is necessary to obtain the Ambassador's return.
 A spy.
 Reverse course... take us back to Federation territory, warp six. Engage.
 Since the time of the first wooden sailing ships, all captains have enjoyed the happy privilege of joining two people in the bonds of matrimony. And so now it is my honor to unite you Keiko Ishikawa, and you Miles Edward O'Brien together in marriage here in the sight of your friends and family.
 (softly) She just left.
 (nods) A boy. (beat) At the same time we were facing destruction... this small miracle was taking place.
 (softly) Welcome aboard.
 Captain's log: Stardate 44429.6. We are on a mapping survey near the Cardassian sector. It has been nearly a year since a peace treaty ended the long conflict between the Federation and Cardassia.
 needed.
 Be on the lookout for a Cardassian patrol vessel, Mister Worf. They should be hailing us soon.
 Last time I was in this sector, I was on the Stargazer, running at warp speed ahead of a Cardassian warship.
 Believe it. I'd been sent to make preliminary overtures to a truce... I lowered my shields as a gesture of good will. But the Cardassians weren't impressed. They took out most of my weapons and damaged the impulse engines before I could regroup and run.
 Well, I hope their scout vessel makes contact soon. It's not a good idea to stay too long on a Cardassian border without making your intentions known.
 Increase power to forward shields!
 Hail them again, Mister Worf.
 Evasive action -- Delta Sequence. Mister Worf, ready phasers.
 Mister Worf, limit targets to engines and shields...
 Fire.
 Continue phaser fire.
 Let's see if they'll answer our hail now, Mister Worf.
 (stepping forward) This is Captain Jean-Luc Picard, of the Federation Starship Enterprise.
 Why have you fired on us?
 (perplexed) There is a treaty between our people...
 A Federation starship... ?
 Gul Macet... the Federation and the Cardassians have struggled too hard for peace to abandon it so easily...
 Let me talk to my superiors... find out what's behind this. Give me one hour. The alternative is for us to continue firing at each other. In such a contest, you would be at a disadvantage.
 Ben Maxwell... he's one of Starfleet's finest Captains... he must have had provocation.
 Then he's still in Cardassian space.
 Will the Cardassians cooperate... ?
 ... there will be three Cardassians transporting on board... Their Captain, Gul Macet and two of his aides. (beat) My intention is to be as open as possible with them... allow them to share in our search for the Phoenix.
 They will be our guests, Mister Worf. I don't want them to feel like prisoners.
 I understand your concerns. And I realize... that we have had a long and difficult history with the Cardassians.
 However... it is not an exaggeration to say that the difference between peace... and war... is up to us. And the way we treat the Cardassians may make the difference.
 (considers) Very well, we will limit their access. But instruct your people... they are guests.
 Counselor, stay close to the crew. Some of them might be uncomfortable with the Cardassians on board. I want no incidents.
 Mister Data, is there anyone on board who served previously with Captain Benjamin Maxwell?
 Very well. Mister Riker... Counselor... you will greet our guests in Transporter Room Three. And advise Chief O'Brien that I will be calling on him.
 Captain's Log, supplemental: We have entered Cardassian territory, and are proceeding in our quest to locate the Phoenix.
 (jumping in to keep it smooth) We would welcome any additional intelligence your forces could provide.
 Of course you would have concerns, Gul Macet. It is precisely because of that fact that I am including you in every aspect of our effort. (gesturing) You are here, with my staff, hearing reports as I hear them. Nothing is edited... nothing withheld.
 Please. Let us continue.
 Our Transporter Chief, Mister O'Brien, has served with Benjamin Maxwell. I thought he might provide some insights.
 Mister O'Brien... I believe Captain Maxwell lost his family... during a raid on an outpost.
 Gentlemen, please. Let us avoid speculation, and confine this discussion to facts. Now, Mister O'Brien --
 (keys insignia) Yes, Lieutenant.
 Will you join me on the Bridge?
 Ensign, set a course -- warp six. Mister Worf, send a message by sub-space. Tell them to prepare to rendezvous with us.
 Yes?
 I'm sure that's true. However, given the circumstances, I'd prefer to make the initial contact myself. As I'm sure you would if the situation were reversed.
 At the moment, we have an isolated incident. If I reach him first, diplomatic efforts can still prevail. (beat) But if one of your ships decides to retaliate against the Phoenix... we risk losing control of the situation.
 No. I will not.
 The pursuing ship is the Phoenix.
 We... are able to make that determination.
 What is important at the moment is that your ship may be in jeopardy. Mister Worf -- any answer to our communications?
 Put a repeating message on all sub-space channels. Make it a Priority One communique -- break off pursuit immediately. (turns to Macet) Gul Macet... as you can see, we are doing everything in our power to reach the Phoenix.
 Mister Data.
 Mister Worf -- has there been any response to our hails?
 Very well... prepare to relay the transponder code of the Phoenix to the Cardassian warship.
 And then send a message to Captain Maxwell... advise him that we have relayed his location to the Cardassians.
 I'm aware of that. Mister Worf -- any response from the Phoenix?
 Mister Data, any change in their their course?
 Mister Worf... relay the prefix codes of the Phoenix to the Cardassian warship.
 I cannot allow Maxwell to ambush that supply ship. Mister Worf -- now.
 Mister Data, overlay weapon ranges of the two ships...
 (to Macet) Does the supply ship carry any weapons?
 Mister Data... estimated time until we intercept the Phoenix.
 Ensign, increase to warp nine.
 I wanted to... chat with you.
 Ben Maxwell must be quite a man.
 Then... from your knowledge of the man... what has gone wrong?
 How did he take it... when his family was killed?
 I see...
 You don't care for the Cardassians...
 Within the last hour... Benjamin Maxwell has sent over six hundred of them to their deaths.
 I think... when one has been angry for a very long time... one gets used to it. Then it becomes comfortable... like old leather. (beat) And finally, it is so familiar that one can hardly remember feeling any other way. (beat) But in the long run, we are the ones who are damaged by that kind of anger. We are. Not them.
 Mister Worf, you may release the man.
 Mister Worf, please accompany him.
 You have the Bridge, Number One.
 (conciliatory) You may take whatever action against him you feel is appropriate. I consider the matter closed.
 If there is to be a lasting peace, Gul Macet, neither you nor I must allow any one man to undermine our efforts...
 Picard here.
 Captain's log, Stardate 44431.7. We have established communication with Captain Maxwell, and he has agreed to come on board.
 Captain...
 Sit down, please. (to Riker) That will be all, Commander.
 The thought has occurred.
 I know of nothing out here that could justify what you've done.
 How do you know this?
 From whom? Where is your documentation?
 In other words, you have no documentation...
 Whatever circumstances you believed you encountered, why didn't you notify Starfleet?
 You weren't under fire.
 Whose lives?
 Why?
 You have killed nearly seven hundred people... taken us to the brink of war...
 And so you alone simply decided to dispose of the treaty...
 'What had to be done'? For whom, Maxwell? (beat) Why does a man with your long, brilliant service suddenly abandon the fundamental principles that he has believed in, even fought for, all his life... ? I'll tell you what I believe... it was because of what they did to your wife... and your children...
 ... to avenge their deaths.
 I'll accept the judgement of history.
 What the Cardassians have or haven't done is irrelevant...
 We are not going after any more Cardassian ships, Captain Maxwell... you are going to return to your bridge and set a course for Starbase Two-one-one... the Phoenix and the Enterprise will return to Federation space together. I will permit you the dignity of retaining your command during our voyage. My only alternative would be to put you in our brig, while we tow your ship back to starbase in disgrace.
 You understand your orders?
 Mister Worf, report to my Ready Room. Our guest is departing.
 Captain's log, supplemental: With the Phoenix in close formation, we are proceeding directly to Starbase Two-one-one.
 Mister Data, how long before we clear Cardassian space?
 Mister Worf, send a message to Admiral Haden at Starfleet. Inform him of our projected time of arrival.
 (to Conn) Ensign, change course to pursue. Mister Worf, hail Captain Maxwell.
 Continue your hail, Lieutenant, Priority One message. (to Macet) Do you know what that vessel might be?
 Ensign, warp eight. Overtake him.
 Warp nine, Ensign. Mister Worf, arm phasers... continue hails...
 Get him up here.
 On screen.
 Mister O'Brien... your former Commander is about to place me in the unenviable position of having to fire upon another Federation ship. I will need to draw upon your knowledge of the man... how he thinks... what he is capable of doing...
 On screen.
 Captain Maxwell, you have disobeyed a direct order...
 The Cardassian ship will not be boarded. You will transport yourself aboard the Enterprise...
 And I will use whatever force is necessary to prevent you from taking that action, Captain.
 Red alert. It appears you are correct, Mister O'Brien.
 Ready phasers... load torpedoes...
 Make it so.
 Captain's log, supplemental: Captain Maxwell has turned his ship over to his First Officer and transported aboard the Enterprise. I have confined him to quarters for the return voyage.
 (acknowledges) Thank you, Mister O'Brien. Well done. That'll be all.
 The loyalty you would so quickly dismiss does not come easily to my people, Gul Macet. You have much to learn about us. Benjamin Maxwell earned the loyalty of those who served with him. In war, he was twice honored with the Federation's highest citation for his courage and valor. And if he could not find a role for himself in peace, we can pity him, but we shall not dismiss him.
 Oh, one more thing, Macet. Maxwell was right. Those ships weren't carrying scientific equipment, were they?
 A 'research' station within arm's reach of three Federation sectors... ? Cargo ships running with high energy subspace fields that jam sensors?
 I was here to protect the peace, a peace I firmly believe is in the interests of both our peoples. But if I had attempted to board that ship... I am quite certain that you and I would not be sitting here now. And that ships on both sides would be arming for war.
 (interrupting) Take a message to your leaders, Gul Macet. We know. We'll be watching. We'll be ready.
 Freeze program.
 Very nicely done, Data... your performance skills really are improving...
 And a very interesting one... you should be congratulated...
 Well, you've never known fear. But as an acute observer of behavior, you certainly should be able to approximate...
 Your mentors... ?
 "Method acting?" Yes, I'm vaguely familiar with it... why would you choose such an old-fashioned approach...
 But that would seem an impossible task for you, Data.
 On my way, Number One... (to Data) Data, the moment you decided to stop imitating other actors and to create your own interpretation... you were already one step closer to being truly human.
 Nature of the emergency...
 (continuing) I am Captain Jean-Luc Picard of the U.S.S. Enterprise. Please identify yourself.
 Lieutenant Worf, can you improve our reception?
 Doctor Clark, we can barely maintain communication with you. Can you boost the level of your power source?
 Under attack?
 Ensign, set a new course for Ventax Two...
 Doctor Clark, what has caused the riots... ?
 Captain's Log, Stardate 44474.5. We have reached Ventax Two and are attempting to contact the Federation science station, which at last report was under siege by a mob.
 On screen, before we lose contact.
 Doctor Clark, this is Captain Picard. We are ready to beam you and your staff on board the...
 Transporter Room Three! Lock onto the station team and beam them aboard.
 Beam up Doctor Clark by himself... Mister Worf, escort him to my ready room...
 Number One, try to make some sense of this "mess."
 What do you mean, "now?"
 Be careful, it's hot...
 So they reverted to a simpler existence... ?
 Until what, doctor?
 And who is Ardra?
 Have you located the science team, Number One?
 I am Captain Jean-Luc Picard. Is there nothing you can do... ?
 (to Clark) Prophecies?
 But poorly timed...
 Visions? Do you mean dreams?
 Jared, tell your people if our hostages are released, I am prepared to offer you Federation assistance should this Ardra return.
 Mister Data, what do we know about this Ardra figure?
 I think I should meet with Acost Jared... he's still our best hope for the release of the hostages.
 No... I'm going down to the planet...
 (interrupting) Mister O'Brien can stay locked on our communicators and pull us out, if necessary. Mister Worf and Mister Data, you will accompany me... I'm hoping the hostages have not been moved far... if the opportunity presents itself we will move quickly...
 Counselor, I'll want you with me too...
 Jared, you must attempt to calm your people. There is no reason for panic.
 If the tremors have frightened people... leading to this hysteria over Ardra... allow us to reassure them... (looking to Data)
 If you can at least help us locate our people...
 Nonsense... it is only...
 I am Jean-Luc Picard of the Federation Starship Enterprise.
 Who are you?
 If your intent is intimidation, madame, you are not succeeding.
 I have encountered many with a more credible claim to being the devil than you, madame.
 You claim you were here a thousand years ago and negotiated a contract... ?
 I'd like to see that contract...
 (challenging) You won't mind if we don't take your word for it... ? Jared, with Your permission, Mister Data will review the documents... thoroughly.
 I only remain here to secure the release of Federation hostages.
 Enterprise, advise Doctor Clark that the hostages are being released...
 (mostly to himself) Goodness... had nothing to do with it. (to Com) Enterprise, three to beam up. Mister Data will remain on the surface... (to Data) I want a complete report on the contents of these scrolls. I will not abandon this planet to that woman. (MORE)
 Q would never bother with contracts.
 Yes, I noticed that too, Counselor... I had the distinct feeling we were in the presence of a flim-flam artist...
 Her powers are at best unclear. Think about it, Worf... Transporter technology can make things appear and disappear... the illusion of turning into a Klingon creature could be accomplished by a holographic projection...
 We're capable of recreating any of these events but she dresses them up and delivers them with a dramatic flair...
 Exactly.
 (acknowledges) Number One, you and Worf will run high-resolution scans of this star system. Look for a ship or a base of operations -- anything large enough to generate that power... Mister La Forge, accompany Doctor Clark back to the science station... see if you can trace the origin of the tremors...
 Madame, you will either leave my Bridge or I will remove you by force...
 Mister Worf...
 Transporter Room Three, lock on to the intruder and transport her to the planet surface...
 Ensign, I want shields up until further notice.
 Report, Data.
 Captain's log, supplemental. The claim this woman, who calls herself Ardra, has made upon my ship is clearly an empty threat. But she has further inspired my determination to expose her for the fraud she is.
 Come.
 (acknowledges) Mister Data... A wise man once said there's a sucker born every minute.
 I have been examining the dynamics of what used to be called the confidence game... it is really quite fascinating and worthy of your study...
 I do, Mister Data... and our job is to find a way to out con the con artist...
 We can only speculate about what occurred on this planet a thousand years ago, Data... Maybe a Ventaxian leader saw the destruction of his society at hand and conceived this Contract of Ardra to motivate change. Or maybe there really was an Ardra of some sort who was the basis of this myth. (shrugs) Who knows? The point is -- somehow a fundamental theology was created that transformed this society. (MORE)
 But along with all the benefits of change, came a latent fear that has been passed down through generations...
 (nods) And now we are asked to believe she has. (beat) As you may recollect from your performance as Ebenezer Scrooge, Data, "fear" can be a powerful motivator.
 In the hands of a con artist, fear can be used to motivate obedience, capitulation... to exploit innocent people. That is what I believe is happening here.
 I appreciate the fact that we have encountered species that live that long... so I will admit the possibility. But I do not believe this woman is the devil or had the powers to create harmony on this world. These people made massive changes that improved their quality of life... they did this on their own. And I intend to prove it. But I need a loophole... something I can use to challenge the validity of the contract...
 Check it again... and check every Ventaxian legal precedent for the last thousand years...
 (continuing) We'll talk first thing in the morning.
 What's that, Data?
 Bah. Humbug.
 (to com) Security to Captain's quarters...
 Picard to Lieutenant Worf!
 I'm growing tired of your games, madame...
 I find nothing tantalizing in your garish display... on the contrary, I find it obvious and common...
 You shallow, pathetic woman.
 Easily.
 I think not.
 Neither was I.
 (interrupting) It's all right Worf. Ardra somehow transported me down here. Beam me directly to my quarters.
 Just have Mister Data fetch me in a shuttle and have him bring along a uniform...
 I did.
 (frustrated) La Forge and Doctor Clark have made no headway... Worf and Commander Riker have not picked up anything on their scans...
 Yes?
 Summarize the pertinent points, Data...
 That's exactly what I needed... good work, Data...
 I intend to play a confidence game of my own on our new landlord...
 The same way any confidence game is run... by making her believe she is getting something for nothing...
 Enterprise. Enterprise. Do you read me? Enterprise, come in.
 I don't believe Ardra is capable of transporting the Enterprise a lightyear away. Continue hailing them, Mister Data... repeat on all frequencies...
 Where did it originate?
 Gentlemen, I need to find that source in order to defeat this woman...
 What have you done with my ship, Ardra?
 I do not recognize your claim on the Enterprise or on this world for that matter... and in accordance with Ventaxian legal precedent I call for an arbitration...
 But there is, madame, for you are a fraud and I intend to prove you could not have affected the changes that took place on this planet...
 An illusion. Magicians have been making all sorts of things disappear for ages.
 If you are who you say you are, you have nothing to lose in an arbitration.
 I am prepared to offer you a further incentive... if you win, I will take you to the ruins of Ligillium...
 I do.
 And what would that be?
 I agree to your terms.
 We must agree on an arbiter.
 Mister Data? He is a member of my crew.
 Why?
 Data, where else on this planet will I find someone that she cannot intimidate. You are incapable of fear... in this play, you are the perfect choice for the role.
 I understand. You'll make a fine judge.
 I accept Data as arbiter.
 Objection. The witness has no personal knowledge.
 Objection. There is no conclusive evidence that this woman visited the planet a thousand years ago...
 (dry, to Ardra) That would be quite acceptable.
 (rising, aghast) But your honor... !
 I must object! The answer would be pure speculation.
 Objection!
 Your honor, nothing in this testimony proves that Ardra herself had any power to affect the lives of the Ventaxians. My opponent has failed to prove her case and I therefore move that her claim be summarily dismissed.
 Objection.
 No, I don't.
 (beat) No.
 Jared, you have described quite thoroughly the history of your people before and after Ardra's first visit. But I am a little unclear on the change itself. Did Ardra simply snap her fingers, transforming Ventax Two into paradise?
 Did she personally form the government that has peacefully ruled Ventax Two for a millennium?
 I see. So Ardra advised this council...
 Well, then she must have destroyed all weapons on the planet...
 Which Ardra wrote, I assume.
 Well then, let's move on to the environmental gains made on Ventax Two. How were those accomplished...
 But Ardra must have at least purified the polluted water and air...
 Did Ardra pick up even one piece of trash?
 Excuse me, but it sounds as though with a great deal of hard work and courage, your ancestors changed this world all by themselves.
 No further questions.
 I believe my associate, Mister La Forge is bringing me that very information... If I may have a recess...
 Mister La Forge, my reputation as a litigator, not to mention my soul, is in serious jeopardy...
 You've identified her source of power... ?
 She has a Romulan cloaking device?
 And the Enterprise?
 Can you make contact?
 Good... here's what I want to do... but we have less than an hour...
 Jared, you are a wise and experienced leader, I would guess you trust your senses...
 And all your senses tell you this woman here is the most powerful force on this planet, don't they...
 Jared, what would you say if I told you that Ardra has no powers whatsoever?
 Ah yes, Ardra's magic. Jared, would you believe me if I told you that I could steal Ardra's powers and perform the same magical acts as she?
 That is true. I am not Ardra. And yet, I can create a tremor just as she did.
 Agreed. Ardra, if you would do the honors and stop the tremors...
 What's the matter?
 Well, I don't.
 (continuing) Recognize the old bag of tricks? How about this one?
 Come back if you can, Ardra. No... ? Fine, allow me...
 Impudence?
 Impudence is pretending to be Fek'lhr of Klingon...
 Your honor, I appreciate the court's indulgence... allow me to explain. A team from the Enterprise has taken control of this woman's ship in orbit around Ventax Two. Thank you for your help, Number One.
 They have been monitoring me on my communicator... and executing a prearranged program on her ship's computer... a fairly ingenious combination of force field projection, holography, and transporter effects. Ardra controls her magic literally by the blink of an eye... centuries old technology -- an implant that allows her eye movements to choose and activate each illusion. (beat) She once told us she is known by many names. At least she was honest about that. Her crew has admitted that she has in fact used twenty-three aliases in this sector alone...
 (continuing) ... deceiving innocent people in petty schemes for years.
 Ventax Two offered her the greatest opportunity of her nefarious career. She learned about the myth of Ardra, studied it... and expertly played on your fears until your people were ready to virtually surrender to her.
 No, Jared... as I've tried to tell you, you saved your own lives a long time ago...
 (nods) Your honor.
 Captain's Log, Stardate 44502.7. Early completion of our mission at Harrakis Five has allowed me to grant extra personal time for many of the crew.
 (continuing) Given our recent tight scheduling, this has come as something of a relief.
 (continuing) Our diplomatic assignment in the Evadne system is a ten day journey past the Ngame Nebula, and I expect it to be uneventful. I personally am using the time to fulfill a promise to a colleague.
 She's my cousin.
 Sorry, Gloria -- I didn't want to get you involved. She has nothing to do with this, Johnny.
 He's lying, Gloria -- don't listen to him.
 It's a mystery, Guinan... Who was this man? Who killed him? Where's the money he was talking about? A mystery. Now, we begin the search for clues.
 That's fun.
 A forty-eight Packard with whitewalls... I couldn't catch the license plate...
 (reacts) It's all right. I'll take it, Madeline.
 (a little ruffled) What is it?
 (a smile) I appreciate the consideration, Commander. What can I do for you?
 Nothing unusual about that.
 Now that is unusual.
 Yes, thank you, Data. Procedures require us to investigate. Recall the bridge crew and set a course.
 I'm afraid I have a twenty-fourth century mystery to deal with, Gloria. You're welcome to carry on if you'd like.
 A wormhole?
 Agreed. Ensign, take us --
 Data?
 Apparently so. How long were we unconscious?
 You were not affected?
 -- Thank you, Data.
 (continuing) Well, where the hell are we?
 Proceed.
 Go ahead, Doctor.
 The Enterprise just jumped through a wormhole. (MORE)
 We were all unconscious for about thirty seconds.
 (glancing around) Little or no damage on the Bridge, Doctor.
 Ship's status?
 Counselor? Are you alright?
 Not too bad, all things considered.
 There's still the anomalous M-Class planet we were going to investigate. Do we go back?
 Make it so.
 Readings, Data?
 On screen.
 Data, run a full diagnostic to make sure the wormhole didn't cause any permanent damage to the sensors.
 Ensign, set us back on a course for... (off Riker's doubt) Number One? A problem?
 We don't have the time.
 We've encountered a minor mystery, one that has been solved to my satisfaction. Number One, unless there's a major objection, Ensign McKnight will set us a course for Evadne Four.
 Ensign.
 You wanted to see me, Beverly.
 A "minor mystery"? That seems to be a recurring phrase around here lately. (indicating table) Please.
 (surprised) Diomedian scarlet moss. I didn't know you were an enthno-botanist.
 You've got a good crop going there. As I recall, it's not easy to cultivate.
 Correct.
 Perhaps you've got some sort of fast-growth strain.
 But that would mean we were unconscious for a full day. And yet everything else on board indicates that we were out for only thirty seconds. The ship's chronometer, the computer...
 (continuing) Everything else... including Commander Data.
 Captain's log, supplemental. Commander Data continues to maintain that we were unconscious for only thirty seconds, despite Doctor Crusher's evidence to the contrary.
 Thank you, Data. An intriguing hypothesis.
 (continuing) Perhaps we've got a tempest in a test tube, after all.
 (lightly) Data, I promised Mister Nelson in Engineering that you would assist him on the sensor diagnostics. You'll find him hard at work on Deck Thirty-six.
 (to Geordi) Did you believe Data's explanation?
 (continuing) A frank answer, Commander.
 I'm not sure. I have never known Data to lie, and yet...
 It could be that whatever caused this situation affected Data as well. (beat) Or it could be that he's telling the truth... and this is just... another minor mystery.
 Proceed on both counts. Meanwhile, we'll maintain our present course. If there is something wrong with Data, we don't want him aware of our suspicions.
 (keying insignia) What is it, Doctor?
 I'm on my way to Engineering. Join me.
 Our internal clocks.
 And were they?
 And the bad news?
 That's an understatement. (beat) Is it possible that something or someone affected you -- without your knowledge?
 Data, would you consent to being examined by Commander La Forge?
 (to com) Come.
 Please escort Commander Data to Engineering.
 Captain's log, supplemental. It has become clear that everyone aboard the Enterprise has lost an entire day. As the mystery of what actually occurred during those missing hours continues to deepen, so do my doubts about Commander Data.
 And?
 I was almost hoping you'd find a problem.
 This entire mystery began when our sensors detected that planet. First it was class "M"... now it isn't...
 Data launched that probe.
 What happened to us in that missing day? Surely clues must exist. Each of you think back to what you were doing right before we blacked out. Reenact it if need be. Look for anything odd or --
 Deanna, are you alright?
 Perhaps Sickbay would be a better idea.
 See the counselor to her quarters.
 Is she alright?
 Deanna, what happened?
 What did you see?
 Yes, Geordi.
 Do you recognize the planet, Data?
 (to Data) Strange that an obscure planet several hundred light years from here should be picked up by our probe.
 Data, did you take this image from the ship's library and then program the probe to send it back to us?
 But you don't deny it.
 Geordi, send another probe to the T-tauri system.
 Counselor Troi just had a very disturbing hallucination.
 For the moment. Can you tell me if Deanna's incident is in any way related to the missing time period?
 Data! You're the key to this entire mystery. And you've done nothing but block my attempts to solve it. Why are you fighting me?
 What does that mean?
 You would rather endanger Deanna Troi, a friend, than tell me what's going on?!
 Are you saying that by not cooperating, you're actually protecting us?
 Then I'm going to ask you again. And I'm ordering you to respond directly. What really happened to us?
 What would you have me do?! How would you handle this, if our positions were reversed?
 Do you know what a court-martial would mean? Your career in Starfleet would be finished.
 Do you also realize that you would most likely be stripped down to the wires to find out what the hell went wrong?
 During the missing day?
 You're suggesting he was conscious?
 Our memories of that day?
 By whom?
 I can't accept that explanation.
 Granted. But I am beginning to suspect that Data is refusing to cooperate because he believes he is acting in the best interests of the Enterprise.
 (to Com) Yes, Geordi.
 (to Com) Acknowledged.
 Now maybe we'll get some answers.
 The same planet our sensors picked up before the so-called wormhole...
 That's because there isn't a wormhole. There never was.
 It was a ruse to throw us off the track. Look at the clues. Doctor Crusher's incubation experiment, the computer clock, the transporter trace all indicate the existence of a missing day. Worf's broken wrist suggests that we may have been awake and aware for that day, and possibly in a struggle for our lives.
 Not necessarily, Doctor. Data's behavior clearly suggests we did not. Why else would he be willing to sacrifice his career rather than tell us the truth?
 The only alternative left is a stalemate. A compromise might have been reached... a compromise that could have forced Data into silence.
 Possibly, Number One. And I would be willing to live with the mystery... but Data's role in this must be ascertained... or he will never be trusted with starship duty again. I cannot live with that.
 (to McKnight) Ensign, take us back to the scene of the crime. Go to warp two.
 Drop to impulse. Lieutenant Worf, maximum shields, ready all weapons.
 On screen.
 Hold position. Let's see what it does.
 Let's see what happens when it hits the shields.
 (indicating viewscreen) As you can see, we're back to where this all started.
 Why?
 Why? What is the source of that risk? (indicating screen) The energy field?
 (temper rising) Data, you sound like you're stuck in a feedback loop. You have free will. You very well can say. You have a choice.
 Not by choice? (indicating screen) Are you somehow being controlled by that force? Did Geordi miss something when he examined you?
 Then why are you still compelled to disobey my orders? How --
 During the missing day. Were you contacted by Starfleet? Were you given orders to conceal the truth from us?
 Dammit, Data! It's the only explanation that makes sense! This ship is not going anywhere until I get an answer. Now who gave you such an order?
 I... ordered you to lie?
 Do as Data says. Now!
 The Paxans. Who are they?
 (to Troi) We are explorers, not invaders.
 Go on.
 What went wrong this time?
 Status, Data?
 Options, Mister Worf?
 Can we go to warp?
 No! Everyone stop!
 (to Troi, carefully) Who are you?
 If you destroy this ship, others will come searching for us. You may not be able to stop them all. Knowledge of your civilization could be spread across half the galaxy.
 Allow us safe passage and we will protect your right to privacy to the best of our ability. We will tell no one of your existence.
 This biochemical stasis. Does it supress synaptic functions?
 Then you must have the capability of affecting memory. Could you erase the short term memory of everyone on this ship? Remove all knowledge of this event? Allow us to proceed as though it never happened?
 Data, I have to give you a most unusual order... I'm not quite sure how well you will be able to integrate it into your program...
 Good. Because our survival depends upon it. I am ordering you never to reveal what has happened here today. Not to Starfleet, not even to myself. You will conceal your memory of the Paxans for as long as you live. Is that understood?
 (to Troi) Satisfactory?
 Excellent. (to everyone) Now, our task is to eliminate any information in the ship's records that might lead to knowledge of this incident. Let's get to work.
 (re: Troi) Here we are again.
 Wait. Please.
 The plan failed because clues were left behind that suggested a mystery. And to many humans, a mystery must be solved. Doctor Crusher's incubation experiment, Worf's wrist, Troi's hallucinations... little pieces of evidence that led us to even more clues about the clock, the transporter trace, Data's odd behavior... Don't you see... without clues, there would be no mystery! If we were to simply eliminate all the clues and begin again...
 Exactly. Consider the first time a run-through, a rehearsal... to shake out all the flaws. The second time will succeed -- if we leave no clues.
 Welcome back.
 (continuing) Data, Geordi -- reconfigure the computer and all records. Number One, you're to oversee the rest of the ship. (to all) Let's get it right this time.
 Data, what happened... ?
 I should say so...
 How long were we out?
 It could be worse.
 The ship just went through a wormhole. The entire crew was unconscious for approximately thirty seconds.
 (glancing around) Apparently not.
 Status reports?
 Counselor?
 Well, then. We still have that anomalous M-Class planet to investigate. (to McKnight) Ensign, replot a course back to...
 Make it so. And put out a hazard advisory to Starfleet.
 Set a course to Evadne Four, Ensign.
 Engage.
 Excuse me, Mirasta Yale?
 My name is Jean-Luc Picard. This is my associate Deanna Troi. May we come in?
 About space. About the universe you are preparing to enter.
 We have been monitoring your progress toward warp drive capability. When a society reaches your level of technology and is clearly about to initiate warp travel, we believe it is time to make first contact. We prefer meeting like this rather than a random confrontation in deep space.
 We almost always encounter fear and shock on this sort of mission. We hope you will be able to help facilitate our introduction.
 (grins) I assure you this is no joke. (holding up his hands) You can see we are quite physically different than Malcorians. (MORE)
 And with your permission, I am prepared to prove what I am saying.
 (keys insignia) Picard to Enterprise. Three to beam up.
 The Federation prefers to make first contact like this... rather than a random confrontation in deep space.
 We try to learn as much as possible about a planet before first contact.
 To be sure, we get an incomplete picture from long distance... that's why we also do on-surface reconnaissance.
 (off her reaction) We've found that the most hazardous aspect of this kind of mission is a lack of sufficient information...
 We do have a complication here, Mirasta. One of our people is missing. My first officer, Commander William Riker. (MORE)
 He was on the surface to coordinate the final details with our observation team when he disappeared. Our people have made inquiries... but we have not been able to locate him. If there's any way you can help...
 What about Durken?
 But, with the disappearance of Commander Riker, wouldn't it be prudent...
 The security chief and a medical officer are always present during a first contact transport -- a matter of policy... we've learned to expect the unexpected...
 "Beamed up"...
 Personally, I have been involved with four first contact missions.
 They're still there, Chancellor.
 This vessel also carries families and children, Chancellor. It is not a warship. The Federation is dedicated to the peaceful exploration of space.
 Not at all, Chancellor. Some desire membership. Some do not. And in some cases the philosophical differences are so great, it is not even a consideration...
 This is my bridge.
 Mister Data. Allow me to introduce Chancellor Avel Durken and Space Administrator Mirasta Yale.
 Data is my Second Officer.
 Mister Data will escort you to the transporter room.
 I've been saving this for a special occasion. My brother on Earth produces fruit known as grapes which he turns into wine. He's really quite good at it.
 We have a tradition, Chancellor, called a toast... a drink to salute one's friends and good fortune. I propose a toast to a new friendship.
 I am sure we will find much in common.
 An opportunity to learn from one another.
 Trust requires time and experience...
 Chancellor, we are not here to conquer.
 Today, all I wish to have is a drink between friends. (Durken smiles) A beginning. How we proceed is entirely up to you...
 There will be no conflict.
 We would leave and never return. (beat) We are only here to help guide you... into a new era. I assure you we will not interfere with the natural development of your planet... that is, in fact, our Prime Directive.
 That is not the whole meaning... but it is part of it.
 To instantly transform a society with technology would be harmful and destructive...
 How shall you answer them tonight, Chancellor?
 (greeting) Chancellor...
 (toss away) I know how busy you are.
 In what respect?
 Commander Riker.
 (beat) Mirasta felt it would be a mistake to discuss...
 You're right. It was my error, not hers.
 Chancellor, no starship mission is more dangerous than first contact. We never know what we face when we open the door to a new world. How will we be greeted? What are the dangers? Centuries ago, a disastrous first contact with the Klingon Empire led to decades of war. It was decided then that we must do surveillance before making contact. It was a controversial decision. But I believe it prevents more problems than it creates.
 (nods) In time, there would have been full disclosure. I know I can only ask you to believe that. On some worlds, it is not even an issue. But here, everything our observers reported suggested the people of this world would almost certainly react negatively to our arrival. We could see our surveillance might even be interpreted as an act of aggression. (beat) I was hoping that we would find Commander Riker before you did... so the matter would not complicate our introduction. And it was a mistake.
 Like it?
 Oh, I've made some fine ones in my time.
 Will you release my officer?
 (to insignia) Enterprise, one to beam up.
 Acknowledged, Lieutenant.
 Go ahead, Doctor.
 Acknowledged.
 (tacit approval) We'll meet you on the Enterprise.
 It is a defensive weapon. We do not use it to kill. (to Beverly) Have you been able to ascertain what happened?
 It is your decision, Chancellor. But I must say I regret that we won't have the opportunity of knowing your people better.
 But how can you keep us a secret... when so many have seen and heard so much?
 (to Mirasta) We may not be back in your lifetime. And I have to believe that you are not fully prepared for the risks of space, Mirasta...
 Mister Worf, to my Ready Room...
 Escort Chancellor Durken to the transporter room, Lieutenant... and then assign quarters to Minister Yale. She'll be staying on board.
 Until we return then...
 Captain's Log, Stardate 44614.6: We are approaching Starbase Three-One-Three, where we will pick up a shipment of scientific equipment for a Federation outpost in the Guernica System. At the same time --
 -- we will be hosting a special guest.
 Yes, Mister La Forge. It seems that the exemplary nature of your work has caught the attention of Starfleet Command.
 In fact, someone is coming on board just to see some of the engine modifications you have made.
 The Senior Design Engineer of the Theoretical Propulsion Group -- Doctor Leah Brahms.
 You know Doctor Brahms?
 Well, it should be an enjoyable visit, then. She'll be transporting on board as soon as we arrive at the Starbase. Would you like to greet her on our behalf?
 On screen.
 Magnify.
 Is it a ship?
 Ensign Rager, ahead one quarter impulse. Bring us into orbit around the seventh planet. Maintain a relative distance of ten kilometers from the object.
 A lifeform?
 (almost to himself) "Asked the child of the stranger without any name... whither you go... and whence you came?"
 It seems we were bread and buttered on the same nursery rhymes, Mister Worf.
 (to Troi) What would it be like, Counselor... no ship, no bulky spacesuit... just to live between the stars... and know that the entire galaxy was your home... ?
 Negative. If we're curious about it, it has a right to be curious about us... (to Troi) Counselor, is this "curiosity" motivated by instinct or intelligence?
 (to Rager) Reverse course, Ensign, easily... three hundred k.p.h. Nothing to alarm or provoke it...
 (to Worf) Raise shields.
 Reverse power, full impulse.
 (to com) Commander La Forge, prepare to initiate the warp drive.
 Mister Worf... ready main phasers... minimum power.
 Fire.
 We are out here to explore, to make contact with other lifeforms, to establish peaceful relations, but not to interfere and absolutely not to destroy. And yet look what we have just done -- what I have just done.
 The Bridge is yours, Number One.
 Elaborate, Mister Data...
 (hoping) Then -- perhaps it's still alive...
 Some kind of reaction to our phaser fire, perhaps...
 No wonder it attacked us. It was about to give birth.
 Will this... child be able to survive on its own without the parent?
 Your objection is noted... but we are directly responsible for the death of the parent. We cannot simply walk away now. (to Beverly) We'll proceed at your discretion, Doctor.
 Well done, Doctor. Well done.
 Good. (to Conn) Ensign Rager, set course for the Guernica system.
 No. We've done what we can to help... now it's time to move on. This... child will live the rest of its life without any further interference from us.
 Very well. (to Rager) Five hundred k.p.h., Ensign. Engage.
 (to Rager) Seventeen degrees to port, Ensign Rager.
 Evasive maneuvers, full...
 On screen.
 Data?
 (a beat) None, Lieutenant. None at all.
 Captain's log, supplemental. Since the newborn has attached itself to the hull, it has been making greater and greater demands on the ship's energy, but we have been able to temporarily stabilize our power systems.
 How long before the power drain becomes critical, Mister La Forge?
 (to Leah) Your help would be appreciated, Doctor.
 (a thoughtful beat) Data, is there any way to determine what the destination of the parent might have been?
 (acknowledges) We might be able to deliver it to the same destination.
 Make it so.
 No. It's not.
 Picard to La Forge...
 Commander, I need to see you on the Bridge.
 Ensign Rager, set course two five nine mark three one eight, one half impulse.
 Hold position five hundred kilometers from the periphery of the asteroid field...
 (thinks) Agreed. (to com) Mister La Forge, are you ready to separate our guest from the hull?
 Proceed.
 (to com) Engineering, report!
 (to com) Mister La Forge, what is your status?
 On screen.
 Go ahead.
 Proceed.
 Mister La Forge --
 Mister La Forge... Doctor Brahms... congratulations. You have weaned the baby.
 Captain's log, Stardate 44631.2. We are proceeding through the uncharted rim of a binary star system, where we may have located the U.S.S. Brattain. The missing science vessel failed to arrive at its destination and has not been heard from since a distress call twenty-nine days ago.
 ENSIGN RAGER at Conn. On the viewscreen at a distance, a space craft floats adrift.
 Magnify.
 Life form readings?
 Counselor?
 What is it?
 Number One, assemble your team.
 How long will it take you to compile the data?
 Don't give up on him, Counselor. We're examining the Brattain for clues -- but this man is the only one left who knows what happened there.
 Come.
 What could have caused such an event? Drugs? A virus? Poison...
 Captain's log, Stardate 44635.8: Four days have passed, but we have made little progress in solving the mystery of the Brattain. I have decided we will return to Starbase Two-twenty...
 ... and to that end, Commander La Forge is rigging the Brattain for towing.
 Come.
 (a bit more forcefully) Come.
 Come...
 Explain...
 Are we talking about hallucinations?
 But everything started when we found the Brattain...
 We are preparing to take the Brattain in tow. We'll be on our way within the hour.
 Ensign, maneuver us into position within tractor beam range.
 Ensign Rager, report to Sickbay.
 Ensign Lin, put us into position to engage the tractor beam.
 Mister Worf, ready tractor beam.
 Impulse engines... ahead minimum power.
 Ensign, go to warp engines -- factor one. Engage.
 Data, do we have any propulsion system that is functional?
 Captain's log, Stardate 44639.9. We have now been adrift for a total of ten days. We have sent sub-space distress calls, but because of our distant location, we cannot expect a response for at least another two weeks.
 You mean... a Tyken's Rift...
 Number One... how... are you?
 Any hallucinations? Nightmares?
 It's affecting all of us. I've -- had similar feelings...
 With everyone around us succumbing... it's even more important that at least one of us stay in control of his faculties. I want you to turn in... take a nap. I'll be on the Bridge and you can relieve me in four hours.
 No! No!
 No... stop... no...
 As you were.
 Mister Data... in my Ready Room, please...
 Channeling power into the main deflector dish...
 Very well. Proceed.
 Mister Data...
 Apparently... I am not immune... to the strange forces at work on this ship...
 It's a frightening prospect... to lose control of your mind... (beat) When I was young, I saw my grandfather deteriorate... from a powerful, robust figure... to a -- a frail wisp of a man, who couldn't even remember how to make his way home...
 It is my responsibility... somehow... to see that this ship is guided to safety. I will have to rely on you, from now on... (beat) We may need to count on you for our very survival.
 I hardly ever remember dreams...
 (struggles with it) I... don't recall...
 Caused by -- ?
 You're describing the situation on this ship... But Counselor Troi has reported nightmares...
 Yes...
 All right...
 Data... can we try again?
 Counselor... what are these -- beings -- trying to tell us?
 If it's... possible... what would you say... ?
 Proceed.
 Nothing... no explosion...
 Activate impulse engines...
 Set a course...
 Very well, Mister Data...
 And... thank you.
 Commander Leijten, you said Brevelle was ill last week for several days before he... deserted. What about Mendez?
 The original Tarchannen disapperances were never solved, were they?
 Captain's log, Stardate 44664.5. We have set a course to intercept Lieutenant Hickman's stolen shuttlecraft... and, hopefully, to discover the whereabouts of the other missing officers...
 Slow to impulse power. Mister Worf?
 Hail the vessel.
 Put a repeating message on all sub-space channels. Make it a Priority One communique -- order the Lieutenant to come about and stand to.
 On screen.
 How soon, Data?
 Options?
 (quickly, to Worf) Open a channel.
 Lieutenant Hickman, listen carefully. I am Captain Picard of the Enterprise. You are in danger. You must slow your rate of approach.
 (to com) Lieutenant Hickman, you must do as I tell you. Reduce your velocity and bring your craft to a positive pitch of twenty degrees... now.
 Ready an away team, Number One.
 Your devotion to duty is admirable, Commander... but Doctor Crusher is right. You will remain on the Enterprise until we know whether or not this is connected to the disappearance of the others.
 (firm) We have completed our survey on the surface. Analyzing that data will keep all of us busy for some time.
 Doctor... what about La Forge?
 But according to all reports... so were Mendez and Hickman before they disappeared.
 Almost identical. How do you explain it?
 Doctor Crusher... is this a threat to the Enterprise?
 (stepping in) And what if you begin to change... and feel compelled to return to the planet like the others?
 All right, Mister La Forge... proceed with your investigation. But report to Doctor Crusher for another bioscan at the start of day watch.
 Go ahead, Doctor.
 Very good, Doctor. Keep us advised.
 Computer, what was Commander La Forge's last known location?
 Re-engage... now.
 Our sensor array is useless... we have to find another way of locating him.
 Make it so. Number One, as soon as Data is ready, I want you to lead an away team.
 Is there no hope for the others? Brevelle, Mendez...
 Welcome back, Mister La Forge.
 Then we shall leave them be. I'll order warning beacons placed in orbit and on the surface. Hopefully, no one else will have to go through what you did.
 Captain's log, stardate 44704.2. We have arrived at the Argus Array, the remote subspace telescope at the very edge of Federation space. (MORE)
 The unmanned structure mysteriously stopped relaying its data nearly two months ago.
 ANAYA.
 Onscreen.
 Magnify.
 (to Worf) Is it emitting any signals, Lieutenant?
 Mister La Forge, why don't you go out and take a closer look.
 Captain's log, supplemental. An intense energy surge from the alien probe has severly disabled the shuttle's onboard computer. The away team has been transported directly to Sickbay.
 Very well. Isolate the probe and place it in tow. We'll take it to Science Station Four-Oh-Two in the Kohlan system...
 Then how is it able to move?
 Ensign Anaya, full about, go to one-half impulse.
 Options, Number One?
 Proceed.
 Mister Worf.
 Go to warp two.
 I'm willing to entertain suggestions...
 (to COM) La Forge?
 Mister Worf. Photon torpedos. Maximum yield, full spread.
 (to Com) Thank you, Mister Barclay...
 Captain's log, stardate 44705.3. The Enterprise has destroyed the alien probe. But now we are left with the difficult task of repairing the Argus Telescope. Failure to do so would represent an irreplaceable scientific loss.
 Mister Barclay, I'm glad you could join us. (to Geordi) Your report, Mister La Forge.
 Alright then, Mister La Forge --
 (reacts) Simultaneously? All eighteen?
 Captain's log; supplemental. Apparently as a result of his exposure to the alien probe, Lieutenant Barclay has gained an extraordinary new level of intelligence. The question now is -- how are we to deal with it?
 (a beat) Has Mister Barclay done anything that could be considered potentially threatening?
 Until he does something more menacing than what's been described -- I see no reason why we should prevent him from continuing his work.
 (to Anaya) Ensign, standby for a jump to warp two.
 Warp two, Ensign.
 (quickly to Anaya) Go to manual.
 What happened?
 Computer, how were the Argus reactors shut down?
 Computer! Respond.
 Mister Barclay, please remove yourself from the computer system and leave the holodeck.
 Why is that?
 (to Geordi) Report, Commander.
 (beat) This is an intolerable situation... I have no wish to harm him, but we cannot allow Mister Barclay to continue to act as the ship's computer... I don't care how smart he is.
 That won't give us control of the ship.
 Make it so.
 I think not.
 Mister Data?
 Lieutenant Barclay, are you responsible for this graviton field disturbance?
 Mister Barclay, I'd like you to hold off on this experiment for now.
 Lieutenant, this is a direct order. Discontinue whatever it is you're doing.
 Picard to La Forge. Status?
 Proceed.
 Mister Barclay! (beat) Respond at once!
 (to Worf) Lieutenant, take a security team to Holodeck Three. (beat) Disconnect Mister Barclay from the computer.
 Mister Data... ?
 (awed) The center of the galaxy.
 I am Jean-Luc Picard, Captain of the Federation Starship Enterprise.
 Who are you?
 Yes. I am interrogative... And I would appreciate an explanation...
 (to the alien) What do you want of us?
 (explain) Mister Barclay... ?
 Mission... ?
 Captain's log, stardate 44721.9. The Cytherians have returned the Enterprise to Federation space. We bring back knowledge of their race that will take our scholars decades to examine. Lieutenant Barclay is apparently no worse for his experience.
 Captain's Log, stardate 44741.9. We have arrived at Tagus Three where the Enterprise is to serve as host of the Federation Archeology Council's annual symposium.
 
 I look forward to giving tomorrow's keynote address with great anticipation.
 Come.
 Excellent.
 Tell me, Counselor, in regard to my lecture, which do you suppose would provide greater clarity? A chronological structure, or a division of each excavation's findings into various sociological, religious, and environmental sub-groupings?
 (nodding; but not quite convinced) Still, there is something to be said for a more scientific approach.
 By all means.
 It needs to be. Tomorrow I'll be addressing some of the greatest scientific minds in the Federation. Switzer, Klarc-Tarn-Droth, McFarland. Giants in the field of Archeology. Next to them I'm nothing but an enthusiastic amateur.
 (modestly) Well, I have done my homework... I've examined the findings of every archaeological expedition conducted on the planet's surface...
 (wistful) Indeed. Especially since we still know so little about their origin...
 Hopefully, I've been able to construct some intriguing theories of my own.
 (smiling) Your support is appreciated, Deanna.
 Screen off.
 Vash? How did you get in here?
 I had no idea you were a member of the Archaeology Council.
 You are a member? (a beat) Aren't you.
 Why have you come to Tagus Three?
 Is that the only reason?
 (smiling) I wish I could believe you?
 Come.
 That's quite all right, Doctor. Beverly Crusher allow me to introduce Vash. A friend of mine with the Archeology Council.
 (giving nothing away) So it was.
 Of course.
 I'm glad you approve.
 So, did you enjoy your tour?
 Good.
 By all means. (a beat) Well, I suppose I'll see you then.
 I agree, the Vulcan excavations on Tagus Three were extensive. Unfortunately, they were confined to the northeastern part of the city.
 (to the Vulcan) Pardon me.
 The reception seems to be a success.
 What would you have me tell them?
 I'm afraid that wasn't possible.
 It would have been... inappropriate.
 A Captain does not share his personal feelings with his crew.
 I'm sorry if you're upset.
 (brusque) Splendid.
 Get out of my chair.
 We are not friends.
 What brings you here, Q? Have you been banished from the Continuum once again?
 Then what is it you want?
 A debt?
 I have no idea what you're talking about...
 We all make mistakes.
 Just be gone. That will suffice nicely.
 Some other time, all right? Right now I have several things to attend to.
 No.
 They've been sealed off for over a century.
 Impossible. That would mean breaking Taguan law.
 I'm afraid my answer is still no. My lecture will have to stand on its own. Now, will you please leave my ship.
 Completely.
 (to Conn) Commander Riker, report to my Ready Room.
 I've just been paid a visit by Q.
 He wants to do something nice for me.
 It's me.
 Jean-Luc.
 May I come in?
 To talk.
 If it's all the same to you I'd rather this discussion not take place in a public corridor.
 And I thought I was the only reason you came to Tagus.
 Am I?
 I'm afraid all this equipment will have to be confiscated.
 I could have you placed in the brig.
 If the Taguans were to catch you down there...
 I remember.
 Which you no doubt sold for a nice profit.
 Not while you're aboard my ship. I will not allow it.
 Nor can I change who I am.
 So it would seem.
 I'm in no mood for your foolishness, Q.
 Whatever game you want to play will have to wait until tomorrow.
 What woman?
 You really must be bored, Q. You're letting your imagination run away with you.
 Believe what you wish.
 (very seriously) Stay away from her, Q.
 (interrupting) ... is hereby nullified. I don't want your help... your advice... your favors... or for that matter -- you. Can you understand that once and for all?
 Yes!
 Ladies and gentlemen, members of the Archeology Council. Welcome. It is the mystery of Tagus Three that brings us together today... a mystery that has invited more argument and deduction than the best Sherlock Holmes or Dixon Hill tale. Well, if you'll excuse the conceit, you're about to hear my own detective story.
 For several years, I have been trying to unravel the secrets of Tagus Three. Needless to say, I have not succeeded.
 However, I have, I believe, turned up some new information, that if nothing else, raises a whole new set of mysteries that I hope we can discuss during our time togther.
 There have been nine hundred and forty-seven known Archaeological excavations conducted on the planet's surface.
 Out of that number some seventy-four are generally considered to have revealed findings of major importance.
 The earliest took place some twenty-two thousand years ago.
 The last was completed within the last four hundred years.
 What the hell... !
 (raging) Q!
 I doubt there are many oak trees on Tagus. No, my guess is this is supposed to be Earth. (off reactions) Sometime around the twelfth century. And this is England, Sherwood Forest to be precise. Or at least Q's re-creation of it.
 Exactly, Number One. (a beat) Or should I say, John Little.
 I know. Robin Hood.
 You're quite right, Worf. (loudly) Do you hear that Q? You may as well return us to our ship immediately.
 Quick. Into the forest.
 Mister Worf. That's an order.
 It's about time you showed up, Q.
 We will not share in this pointless fantasy of yours.
 What consequences?
 (grimly) Vash.
 My feelings toward Vash are irrelevant. I'd attempt to save any innocent life, as you well know.
 Q, I ask you to end this now, before anyone else gets hurt.
 Not we Commander. You and the others are to wait here until I return.
 This is not a mission. It's personal, between Q and myself. I don't want any of you involved.
 You have your orders, Commander. I expect you to follow them.
 Yes, I know.
 My staff and I were brought here by an old adversary of mine named Q. I'll tell you the rest once we're safe.
 Come, we don't have much time.
 They're waiting for us back in Sherwood.
 Yes, now let's...
 An excellent one if you'd only hurry up.
 Only too well.
 I suppose you know of a better one.
 And do what?
 (ironic) That is brilliant.
 You don't really expect me to leave you here?
 Must you be so stubborn?
 (to Vash) Behind me.
 My fault?
 We'd have been safe in Sherwood if you hadn't grabbed my sword.
 You should have never interfered.
 I was trying to rescue you.
 I won't.
 Can we just get this over with.
 Your game was for my benefit, Q. She is innocent in all this.
 Let her go.
 That's very impressive.
 But there's something you should know.
 I'm not from Nottingham.
 (shouting) It's over, Q. Now get us out of here.
 If any of my people are hurt...
 (end of his patience) Enough of this.
 Computer, locate Council Member Vash.
 (smiling) Well, this is a relief. I was afraid that Q...
 I'm surprised he wasn't too busy gloating over his victory.
 I may not share my feelings with my crew, but I do have them.
 I wouldn't be surprised if our paths cross again.
 So, where are you off to now?
 (amused in spite of himself) As a matter of fact... yes.
 As payment in full for your debt to me, you will guarantee her safety...
 Captain's Log, Stardate 44769.2. For some weeks we have had a Klingon exo-biologist on board as part of a scientific exchange program. Unfortunately, we suspect that he may have been involved not only in a security breach but in the possible sabotage of our warp drive.
 Retired Admiral Norah Satie, whose investigation exposed the alien conspiracy against Starfleet Command three years ago, is arriving to assist in our investigation.
 pad: SABIN GENESTRA, a Betazoid man; NELLEN TORE, a female assistant, and ADMIRAL NORAH SATIE, retired. She surveys the waiting group before her, finds Picard, and smiles radiantly. Norah Satie is middle-aged, a beautiful woman who has become more so with maturity. She is gracious, elegant, and decidedly feminine. Her smile is generous, bespeaking warmth and intelligence. She moves toward Picard, hand extended.
 Admiral Satie. Welcome to the Enterprise.
 And my First Officer, Commander William Riker. May I show you to your quarters?
 Very well... Commander, will you see to the Admiral's Staff?
 How much longer will it be?
 (acknowledging) That is one reason we tend to suspect sabotage.
 There are disturbing overtones... to the idea of a Klingon providing information to the Romulans...
 Are you... aware... of any other Romulan-Klingon connections that Starfleet Command might have encountered recently?
 This ship has had several encounters which might suggest a potential alliance between those two powers --
 Come.
 Please come in Mister Worf. I particularly want our guest to meet you... Admiral Satie... my head of security, Lieutenant Worf.
 You may have him confined, Mister Worf.
 If you're right... someone else may be involved.
 It's hard for me to believe... but I am grateful for your presence, Admiral. If anyone in Starfleet can help us, it's you.
 In what way... ?
 That sounds like Judge Aaron Satie...
 Through his writing. His judicial decisions were required reading at the Academy.
 I'm willing to wager you trounced your brothers in those debates...
 You must miss him very much.
 Thank you, Doctor Crusher, we appreciate your time. You are excused now. Mister Worf, will you bring in the next person?
 Please sit down, Mister Tarses. For the record, will you state your name and position?
 I assure you this is an informal inquiry... we're not accusing you of anything. However, if you want counsel, it will be provided for you.
 Very well. How long have you held your appointment on the Enterprise?
 You're excused, Crewman.
 Mister Worf...
 It was clear he was frightened, but that's hardly an indication --
 I'm not sure I can sanction any action against Mister Tarses based solely on Betazoid intuitions.
 I must admit... that I'm a bit uneasy with this use of a Betazoid.
 There is a difference between a counselor... and an investigator.
 I do... but I don't act on the basis of her instincts alone.
 You're asking me to restrict Tarses' movements -- based on Sabin's "feeling."
 I have to admit I probably would. And maybe I should re-evaluate that behavior.
 If we had better evidence...
 (he's sure now) No. I won't treat a man as a criminal unless there is probable cause to do so.
 Yes, Mister La Forge...
 We'll be right there.
 There are sub-micron fractures in the metal casing...
 If my men say there was no sabotage, you can be sure there was none.
 Do we know that for sure?
 It would be difficult... but not impossible...
 I remind you all... that Tarses is innocent... until he is proven guilty.
 Very well. But I hope we can put the matter to rest as quickly as possible.
 You've opened the hearing to spectators?
 This hearing is convened on Stardate 44740 as a continuing inquiry into the activities of Crewman Simon Tarses. (beat) Mister Tarses... for your own protection, I have assigned you counsel in the person of Commander William Riker.
 Doctor, you may come forward.
 Thank you, Doctor Crusher. You are excused.
 Admiral Satie... if you have a case to make against Tarses, you had better make it. Or I am calling this off here and now.
 (angry) Agreed. Mister Sabin...
 Mister Worf...
 I need to speak with you.
 What is going on here?
 What has happened to us, Mister Worf?
 I think... we're putting on a drumhead trial...
 Five hundred years ago military officers would upend a drum on the battlefield... sit at it and dispense summary justice... decisions were quick... punishments severe... appeals denied. Those who came to a drumhead were doomed.
 That's true. And he will stand for his crimes.
 (a sharp look) How?
 That is not a crime, Worf. Nor can we infer his guilt because he did not respond.
 No. We must not let ourselves think that. The Seventh Guarantee is one of the most important rights granted by the Federation. We cannot use one of the fundamental principles of our Constitution and turn it against a citizen.
 Yes... that's how it starts. But the road from legitimate suspicion to rampant paranoia is shorter than we might think. Something is wrong here, Worf... I don't like what we have become.
 Here you are, Mister Tarses... do you care for lemon?
 Tell me a little about yourself, Crewman... I know you were born on Mars Colony...
 Did you ever consider applying to the Academy... going the whole route and becoming an officer?
 An elm tree? With a circular bench?
 I spent many an hour there. It was my favorite spot to study.
 But you didn't do it.
 Not if you aren't guilty.
 Admiral Satie...
 I'd like to talk to you.
 In private...
 ... and off the record.
 But I do. This must stop. It's gone too far... you lied to him about the Engine Room -- there was no volatile chemical found there...
 We are hounding an innocent man.
 I talked with him.
 No... he admits his mistake in falsifying his application... but that doesn't make him a traitor.
 (not intimidated) The hearings on Simon Tarses must stop. If necessary, I will go to Starfleet Command.
 What are you saying -- ?
 You never told me about this --
 Admiral... what you're doing here... is unethical... it's immoral... and I will fight it.
 (snapping out of it) Yes... ? Oh... yes, Mister Data. Proceed.
 Yes, of course. Just a bit -- preoccupied.
 Jean-Luc Picard.
 Captain, Federation Starship Enterprise.
 Over three years. Since Stardate 41140.
 If you don't mind... I would like to address the committee.
 I believe that Chapter Four, Article Twelve of the Uniform Code of Justice grants me the right to make a statement before questioning begins...
 I am deeply concerned by what is happening here. It began when we apprehended a spy, a man who admitted his guilt and who will answer for his crime. But the hunt didn't stop there. Another man, Simon Tarses, was brought to trial -- and it was a trial, no matter what others may call it.
 Unfortunately, it was a trial based on insinuation and innuendo. Nothing substantive against Crewman Tarses was offered, much less proven.
 This man has a Romulan grandfather. For that, his career stands in ruins. Have we become so fearful? Have we become so cowardly that we must extinguish a man because he carries the blood of a current enemy?
 I remind you... we are not descended from cowardly people. We come from those who were willing to think the unthinkable, speak the unspeakable... (MORE)
 ... and to defend with passion ideas and causes which were, at the moment, unpopular.
 Admiral, let us not condemn Simon Tarses or anyone else on the basis of half-truth. I implore you... do not continue with this proceeding. End it here.
 Of course.
 Your point, Admiral... ?
 My reports to Starfleet document the circumstances in each of those instances --
 Excuse me?
 I was following orders to deliver the ambassador to a destination near the Neutral Zone, and --
 That's correct.
 No.
 There was no chance of getting her back. We were deep in Romulan space. The safety of my crew was my primary concern.
 Lieutenant?
 Yes. I am fully recovered.
 There is a saying... which many of us have heard since we were school children... "With the first link, the chain is forged. The first speech censured, the first thought forbidden, the first freedom denied -- chains us all, irrevocably."
 Those words were uttered by Judge Aaron Satie -- as wisdom and warning. The very first time any man's freedoms are trampled... we are all damaged. (beat) I fear... that today... on this starship... we are forging that chain.
 No... please, come in, Mister Worf.
 That's good.
 We think we have come so far... the torture of heretics and the burning of witches is ancient history... and then... before you can blink an eye... it threatens to start all over again.
 Villains who wear black hats are easy to spot. Those who clothe themselves in good deeds are well camouflaged.
 Maybe. But it won't stop her. She -- someone like her -- will always be with us... waiting for the right climate to flourish... spreading disease in the name of liberty. (beat) Vigilance, Worf. That is the price we must continually pay.
 As a matter of fact, I...
 Yes, indeed.
 Well at the moment, Lwaxana, I am rather busy.
 Yes. The leading scientist of Kaelon Two and...
 This is a delicate situation, Lwaxana... our first real contact with a very reclusive people... (trying to disengage) And as it will be something of an official greeting...
 Energize, please, Mister O'Brien.
 Doctor Timicin? I am Jean-Luc Picard, Captain of The Enterprise. This is Lieutenant Commander La Forge.
 (Continuing; beat) We welcome you aboard, Sir.
 Ah, I beg your pardon. Doctor Timicin, may I present Lwaxana Troi, of Betazed; also a guest on board, and...
 We have quite a bit of work planned...
 It, uh... would seem Mrs. Troi is our acting ambassador of good will today.
 Captain's Log. Stardate 44805.7. For generations, the people of Kaelon Two have been working to revitalize their dying sun. The Federation has offered to assist in testing what may be a solution to this problem.
 (nods) Our only regret is that it took us three years to find a suitable star after you first contacted us.
 Captain's Log, Stardate 44807.5. The Enterprise has arrived at the Praxillus system, where we will conduct Doctor Timicin's helium ignition test.
 Picard to Engineering...
 ... the system is clear, Mister La Forge.
 Very well. Mister Worf?
 Fire in sequence.
 (hopeful) Mister Data?
 Warp two, Ensign; now!
 (to helm) Ensign... set a course for Kaelon Two. Warp factor five.
 Captain's log, stardate 44812.6. We are orbiting Kaelon Two, and have established contact with Science Minister B'tardat.
 (mid-discussion) The experiment did achieve a stable core temperature for a short time, Minister... that is a significant step forward...
 The Federation is willing to assist in the search.
 (after a beat) We're more than willing to extend our visit, sir.
 Come...
 I beg your pardon?
 Mister Data?
 I'm afraid I have no choice.
 Lwaxana, I'm sorry, but I have no jurisdiction here; irrespective of any personal feelings. We simply cannot interfere --
 (gently, but firmly) The Prime Directive forbids us to interfere with the social order of any planet.
 Computer? Locate Counselor Troi.
 (calls o.s.) Come.
 Timicin. Time for you to leave us, then.
 Any influence, Minister, is by example only. Timicin's decision is of his own free will, I assure you.
 Acknowledged, Commander. (to the monitor) Minister, we are here in friendship, hoping to provide assistance...
 Doctor, you have acted in good conscience... I don't know what else you could have done...
 I'm afraid you're the only one who can answer that, Doctor.
 (beat, with history) Isn't she.
 Any communication, Number One?
 Shields up. Red Alert.
 Doctor, I suggest you return to your quarters...
 (at work) Mister Worf, ascertain their offensive potential...
 I would deeply regret it, Doctor, if you were returning only to ease diplomatic tensions...
 Then I wish you and your people well.
 If there's any reason you'd like to wait a few minutes...
 Permission granted.
 Picard to Ambassador Odan...
 The Federation representative from Peliar Zel has come on board. (MORE)
 Could you meet us in the Observation Lounge?
 And Ambassador... if you should run into Doctor Crusher, would you ask her to join us as well?
 Ambassador Odan, this is Governor Leka Trion, of Peliar Zel.
 Governor Leka has intercepted us before we reached her planet in order to update us on the situation.
 We will be in orbit around Peliar Zel within six hours. If you can arrange for the representatives of Alpha and Beta to be there, Ambassador Odan can beam directly to the planet.
 As you like.
 Counselor... ?
 (dryly) Maybe it's just spring, Deanna... (off her look) Or perhaps these sensations are perfectly normal among the Trill.
 Yes. Quite.
 Come.
 Yes, Ambassador. We've entered orbit... the shuttle will transport you to the surface in a few minutes.
 How will you proceed once you're there?
 It seems to work well for you.
 My staff is quite capable. I'm glad they've been useful.
 I'm sure that's true. Well... shall we make our way to the Shuttlebay?
 I wouldn't presume to speak for her.
 Yes, Ensign?
 Very well.
 Hail the vessel.
 There was no mention of an escort... request a security clearance code.
 Commander, stand by to return to the Shuttlebay.
 Engage tractor beam. Number One -- report.
 We're bringing you in.
 Number One... we're ready to beam you aboard.
 (to the others) We have contacted the Trill. Another host will arrive within forty hours.
 We are at a desperate impasse with the situation in the Peliar system. The attack on our shuttlecraft has inflamed the dispute.
 No one will admit anything. Each side accuses the other and threats are mounting. We need Odan...
 Would you be able to remove the symbiont when the new host arrives?
 Commander... the risk is too great.
 It is your choice, Will.
 Well done.
 Mister Worf, take the Ambassador to his quarters.
 Bridge to Crusher...
 The Ambassador is not well. Please see to him in his quarters.
 Captain's Log, Stardate 44823.8. Representative of the moons of Peliar Zel have agreed to come on board to meet the new Ambassador Odan.
 Ambassador... I can stall the representatives...
 Surely... to present yourself in this condition... will not help our cause.
 Is there any treatment you can give him?
 You're doing all you can...
 Ambassador... when you feel up to it, please join me in my Ready Room.
 It was a fast decision, which we must take as positive. The Alphan representative has agreed... somewhat dubiously... to let you mediate the dispute.
 I have no doubt, however, that they will bolt if anything goes wrong in your discussions.
 No... it's just... for a moment... you sounded more like Will Riker.
 We have received word that your new host will arrive in eighteen hours. Will you be all right until then?
 Yes. Yes, I certainly can. (beat) And for you as well.
 Captain's log, Stardate 44824.4. The representatives of Peliar Zel and its two moons are ready to transport on board. We have learned that they each have troops massed and are ready for combat if this final effort at peace is not successful.
 Ambassador... it's clear you're in pain. You can't get through the next hours without help --
 We will respect your wishes.
 Yes, Mister Worf?
 Thank you.
 Beverly...
 Whatever else I have been to you... I am your friend. I cannot imagine what you are going through... but it must be a kind of hell. I want you to know... I am here... to help you... in any way I can.
 Computer, what time is it?
 Ambassador...
 Mister Worf, make sure the representatives are safely transported off the ship. (to Conn) Ensign, set a course to intercept the Trill ship. Prepare to go to warp nine.
 And... how is Odan?
 You need some rest, Doctor.
 It will be some time yet.
 Captain's Log, Stardate 44891.6. The Enterprise has been ordered to accompany a special emissary from the Klingon High Council to the Kriosian System where one of their colonies is fighting for independence.
 Ambassador, KELL.
 You are prepared to grant them independence?
 If I may ask, Ambassador, what has this to do with us?
 (thank-you) K'adlo. I have been pleased to offer occasional assistance to the Klingon people in the past.
 I can assure you, Ambassador, the Federation would never interfere with the Empire's internal affairs.
 Agreed. Ambassador, I will ask our chief security officer, Lieutenant Worf, to report to you for a full...
 (firm) Mister Worf is my security chief and my tactical officer. This matter clearly falls within his jurisdiction.
 Captain's Log, Stardate 44896.9. We are orbiting Krios, awaiting our first meeting with the Klingon Governor. Commander La Forge has rejoined the Enterprise from Risa.
 Commander La Forge...
 Granted. Welcome back.
 Ambassador Kell, this is my Chief Engineer.
 Mister La Forge has been attending a seminar...
 (continuing) .. on artificial intelligence on Risa...
 We're to be presented with evidence today... we'll need your help in analyzing it...
 Very well. Advise him that we will transport to the surface immediately. (then to Kell) Ambassador...
 (a frown) Governor, what exactly do you believe the Federation has done?
 No, they are not.
 This was captured from the rebels?
 With your permission, Governor, I would like to take that weapon back to the Enterprise and verify its origin.
 Even if these weapons do prove genuine, I assure you some third party is involved. The Federation is not in the business of arming rebellions.
 You speak as if we were enemies, Governor, not allies.
 Qu'vath guy'cha b'aka.
 (keys insignia) Picard to Enterprise. Three to transport.
 But they do have an interest in driving the Federation and the Empire apart. Our alliance is the only thing that keeps them in check.
 of course. My staff will provide their full cooperation.
 (standing) On screen, Mister Worf.
 Governor...
 I don't understand.
 Governor, I assure you that --
 Do you know which transporter was used?
 Mister La Forge, your recommendations?
 Make it so.
 The isolinear chips were definitely altered?
 Our forensic team is trying to identify anyone who might have been in Cargo Bay Four today...
 Proceed... thank you, Mister La Forge...
 Assure him that we are doing everything possible. (beat) And advise him that if necessary I will defend my ship...
 Of course.
 Do you think he would come?
 Qapla'.
 Energize.
 Governor Vagh... thank you for coming.
 Of course.
 (in background to Vagh) Our forensic teams are collecting DNA samples... by tracing biochemical signatures, we'll be able to determine who has been in this bay recently...
 I'm not certain we can. But at the very least we will narrow the list of suspects... and as we continue to check each one's alibi...
 Get him out of here.
 Governor, if I could explain this... I would.
 The Romulans have always wanted to destroy the alliance between the Federation and the Klingons. Had Mister La Forge killed you, Governor, I think you would agree, they might very well have succeeded.
 Then you're suggesting that a Romulan accomplice was in close proximity to La Forge whenever he received the signals...
 I will certainly grant you asylum, Ambassador, as soon as you are absolved of this crime.
 Captain's Log: Stardate 44932.3 The Enterprise is preparing to enter the Mar Oscura, an unexplored dark matter nebula first identified over a century ago.
 Commander Data is modifying several of our photon torpedos for an experiment designed to elicit more information about this unusual phenomenon.
 Report, Mister Data.
 How so?
 It's worth a look. We'll continue with our survey along the way. (to McKnight) Ensign, get the planet's coordinates from Commander Data and plot a course, three quarters impulse.
 Yes, I've heard, Data... and I would be delighted to offer you any advice I have on understanding women. (beat) As soon as I have some, I'll let you know.
 Estimated time of arrival, Mister Data?
 You have the Bridge, Number One.
 (keying insignia) Picard to Lieutenant Worf.
 Step into my Ready Room, please. And bring a tricorder.
 What do you make of this?
 So am I, Mister Worf.
 -- No. I did not.
 (continuing) It seems we have a poltergeist.
 A mischievous spirit.
 (beat) Perhaps this is some kind of practical joke.
 Perhaps not.
 Not yet.
 (cutting him off) -- That's alright, Mister Worf. For now, I think circumstances warrant our caution -- nothing more.
 (to COM) Acknowledged.
 Are you sure there was no malfunction in the sensors?
 (to Data) Mister Data, run a complete systems diagnostic --
 Scan for lifeforms.
 Let's have a look.
 Explanation?
 We will hold position while we seek an explanation for these anomalies. Divert all resources to that end.
 Agreed. Ensign McKnight, plot the most direct course. Ahead warp one.
 Engage...
 Full stop!
 Yes, Commander?
 Like a carriage bouncing over a series of potholes.
 The question now is, how do we get out? Mister Data, can you reconfigure the sensors to detect these anomalies?
 Make it so.
 Not this time, Will.
 I'm going to pilot the shuttle.
 I believe our best chance of escaping this situation is for me to pilot that shuttle. (beat) This is my ship, Will. I've got to do it.
 Shuttle three to Enterprise, telementry link enabled.
 Forward sensors are on line. Ensign McKnight, plot a course for the shortest distance out of the nebula.
 Point one impulse, Number One.
 Changing course... new heading two-nine-nine mark zero-two-nine.
 I missed it by less than a thousand meters, Enterprise... Advise your status...
 Resuming previous course.
 Changing course... heading zero seven three, mark -- two-eight-eight...
 New heading... two-eight-four mark zero...
 Enterprise... I'm losing maneuverability...
 I'm reading fluctuations in the thermal control sub-system...
 Belay that, Number One! I'm re-routing the secondary deuterium supply... switching to manual controls.
 You'll have to make course changes manually until we re-establish the connection.
 New heading... two-nine-nine mark one eight...
 Enterprise -- hard starboard!
 Hold steady... I've completed the re-routing sequence... do you read my navigational inputs?
 New heading. Two-seven-five mark three nine!
 Mister La Forge, I am still having difficulty controlling the shuttlecraft.
 Estimated distance to the nebula's perimeter?
 Is there a way to transfer the microfusion thrusters so I can get a power boost?
 Bearing -- two-seven... make that two-eight-five, mark two-five-five!
 (to Com) Now would be a good time, Mister O'Brien...
 I'm a little dizzy, Number One... but none the worse... on my way...
 Ensign, plot a course for Starbase Two-Sixty. Warp two. Engage.
 Captain's log, stardate 44995.3. We are en route to the Klingon Home World, where I will participate in the installation ceremony of Gowron, the next designated Leader of the High Council.
 (continuing) This visit should also provide an opportunity for one of my officers to correct... a grave injustice..
 immediately embarrassed at receiving his captain in this manner.
 Am I intruding?
 That won't be necessary. (beat) I'm not here as your captain. I'm here as the person that stood with you before the High Council... your cha'DIch.
 (continuing) We'll arrive at your Home World in less than a day.
 That doesn't sound like the man who came to me a year ago... fiercely determined to return home and clear his father's name... or die trying.
 You accepted this... dishonor from the Council in order to hold the Empire together. (beat) The Empire survives. Isn't it time to confront the Council... to regain your family name and let the truth be known?
 Patience is a... human virtue, one which I am proud to see you've taken to heart. But this situation may require a more... Klingon response.
 (continuing, frank) Your discommendation is a facade intended to protect men less honorable than you. It is a lie... and lies must be challenged.
 We will be in orbit around your planet for at least two days... it may be some time before we return again. I would be favorably disposed to grant a leave should you request one.
 (hits communicator) Go ahead, Number One.
 On screen.
 Gowron... this is an unexpected pleasure.
 Successful?
 But Duras died in disgrace. By Klingon tradition, his family should share in that disgrace.
 Who speaks for his family now?
 And they would claim leadership of the Council?
 Then how... ?
 I fail to see what I can do to assist...
 I am prepared to report to the Council that only you have completed the rite of succession...
 That... is beyond my purview.
 I will not step outside the traditional role of the arbiter.
 I can only assure you that I will deal with any challenge according to Klingon law.
 Mister Worf, please escort our guest to the transporter room.
 Mister Data, begin monitoring Romulan activity along the Neutral Zone. Have the outpost stations there start sending us their tactical reports.
 The Duras family is preparing to move against Gowron.
 I don't know. But there's too much history between the Duras (note: plural) and the Romulans to discount the possibility.
 Come.
 (formally) Mister Worf... request granted.
 Mister Worf... (Worf pauses) Qapla!
 (softly, to himself) And good luck.
 (to Council) Qaja plu d'itch jung. La woq you ghir klas qimha. Gowron. Doj hon. Doj hon.
 (interrupting) Mister Worf... have you cancelled your leave?
 Lieutenant... join me in my ready room.
 You are planning to use our files on the Khitomer massacre as evidence against Duras' father?
 Mister Worf... do you not see an inherent conflict of interest...
 You are using your position as a Starfleet officer to affect political change on your planet... there could not be a worse compromise of our fundamental principles...
 (sighs, frustrated) Yes, I know. I understand your motives, and you know I support your goals, but...
 Mister Worf... Mister Worf... (beat, sighs) Mister Worf...
 Here I am lecturing you on a conflict of interest while I'm desperately trying to avoid one of my own. Do you think I wish to allow the Duras family to solidify their hold on the Council? Do you think I cannot see the implications for the Federation? And good Lord, Duras tried to have me killed! (beat) All of my instincts... my training... my very being as a Starfleet officer are at odds with my responsibilities as arbiter for the Klingon High Council. (beat) We walk the same tightrope between two worlds... you and I. We must try our very best to keep those worlds clearly separate... or we shall certainly fall.
 As far as these records from Khitomer are concerned...
 (continuing) I will make the Federation records on the Khitomer massacre available... to anyone who wants them... the High Council, the Duras family... anyone.
 Mister Worf, this is as far as I can go.
 (to com) Yes, Number One.
 Send it through.
 Yes... thank you.
 Nothing would be served by killing the arbiter before his decision.
 Your invitation was... unexpected.
 That... pleases me.
 I am pursuing it with all due vigilance.
 The remaining issue then is to see if he has the support of the law.
 I'll tell you what I see. If I find Toral's challenge valid, the two of you will very quickly gain control of the Council... and Gowron will be found dead shortly thereafter. If I reject Toral's challenge, you will accuse me of doing it only to serve Federation interests. It will give you a rallying cry to declare war and overthrow Gowron.
 You have manipulated the circumstances, ladies, with the skill of a Romulan. (beat) My decision will be announced at high sun tomorrow. Excellent tea. Good day.
 K'tal, this Council knows the law of heredity well. G'now juk Hol pajhard. A son will share in the honors or crimes of his father. Toral is Duras' son... that has been established by the genetic scan. And it is heartwarming to see him embraced by the family of Duras... for they are an old and noble family. (beat) But with due respect to the traditions and laws of this High Council, there is no basis for accepting a petition for leadership from a boy who has fought no battles, shed no blood for his people, earned no honor for himself. Perhaps some day he shall. But not now.
 (continuing) Duras... is dead. His claim to the leadership died with him. Gowron will lead the Council.
 Report.
 Worf is still aboard the Bortas.
 Go to Red Alert.
 It's begun.
 The Bortas should have twice the firepower of a Bird of Prey.
 Ensign Reel... plot a course safely away from the combat area. Half impulse.
 If we come to his aid... we'll be dragging the Federation into a Klingon civil war.
 (to Reel) Ensign... engage.
 I understand your position. However, you must be aware that the Federation will not become involved in what is, by definition, an internal Klingon matter.
 And my duties in that regard are finished.
 (slow and firm) Mister Worf... non-interference in the internal affairs of other cultures is one of the guiding principles of the Federation... and as Starfleet officers, we have all sworn an oath to uphold that principle regardless of personal feeling. (to Gowron) I am sorry... but I must refuse your request.
 Lieutenant...
 (continuing) I'm afraid that I must now recall you to duty. The Enterprise will be leaving this sector immediately.
 Lieutenant, your responsibilities as a Starfleet officer are incompatible with remaining aboard a Klingon ship during a time of war.
 You are ordered to return to duty immediately.
 Am I intruding?
 I understand... that you'll be serving aboard the Bortas.
 Your tactical knowledge and experience should serve them well.
 Are you certain you've made the right decision, Worf?
 Being the only Klingon ever to serve in Starfleet... gave you a singular distinction. (MORE)
 But I always felt that the most unique thing about you was your... humanity. (beat) Compassion... generosity... fairness... You took some of the best qualities of humanity and made them part of you. The result... was a man I was proud to call one of my officers.
 (re: things on bed) I'll have your belongings transported to the Bortas.
 Attention on deck!
 Permission granted. (beat) Qapla'
 Captain's log, stardate 45020.4. We have arrived at Starbase Two-thirty-four, where I have taken the opportunity to make a proposal to Fleet Admiral Shanthi.
 ADMIRAL SHANTHI and a N.D. STARFLEET ADMIRAL. Shanthi is the head of Starfleet, and is a woman of African descent in her late fifties with an almost regal bearing. She is listening to Picard while the N.D. Admiral looks on with disapproval.
 There have been three major engagements in the last two weeks... all of them won by ships loyal to the Duras family.
 Agreed. But if the Duras are being aided by the Romulans, then it becomes very much our concern.
 (continuing) The Romulans have been trying to destroy the Federation_Klingon Alliance for over twenty years, and at the same time, the Duras have been secretly conspiring with the Romulans. (beat) Doesn't it strike you as odd that the Duras are able to field such an overpowering force against Gowron? That they outmatch him at almost every turn?
 And some would say they must be getting help. (beat) The Romulans have always been willing to take enormous risks in order to gain any advantage over the Federation. (with force) Can we seriously believe that now, with the future of the entire Klingon Empire hanging in the balance, they are content to simply stand by and watch?
 We must stop the flow of supplies and equipment from the Romulans to the Duras family. (beat) I propose we take a fleet of ships to the Romulan_Klingon border. We'll take no offensive action, but we'll be in a position to expose any Romulan shipments that try to cross the border.
 My chief engineer has developed a system that should help us nullify that advantage. Each ship will send out an active tachyon beam to the other ships in the blockade fleet. In theory, any cloaked vessel that tries to pass between our ships should cross one of those beams and be detected.
 (quietly) So do I, Number One.
 Captain's log, stardate 45021.3. Convincing Starfleet Command to establish a blockade was relatively painless. Implementing that plan is proving more troublesome.
 Mister La Forge, will we be able to implement your tachyon detection grid with twenty ships?
 (decisive) I want to add the Tian Nan Men, the Hermes, and the Sutherland to join us whether the yard superintendent thinks they're ready or not. Mister Data, select a group of experienced officers from the Enterprise to augment the crews of those ships.
 (to Riker) Will, I want you to command the Excalibur. Her crew was reassigned when she put in for repairs. Geordi, you'll serve as his first officer.
 (continuing, to everyone) I want the fleet to be underway by oh nine hundred tomorrow. Thank you, gentlemen.
 Yes, Data?
 Yes.
 Well... I felt that you were needed here. (beat, then curious) Why do you ask?
 Commander... I believe the starship Sutherland will need a captain. I can think of no one more suited to the task than you.
 Good. (to conn ) Course one one eight mark three five seven, full impulse power (to O'Brien) Signal the fleet to get underway. We'll enter warp once we're clear of the system.
 Engage.
 Signal the fleet to maintain yellow alert until further notice.
 (moves to tactical) Begin long-range scans of the Romulan border.
 (looking at console) Those anomalies could be cloaked ships.
 Open a channel to the Excalibur.
 Deploy the fleet, Will. It's time to spread our net.
 Mister La Forge, how long do you think it will take the Romulans to detect the tachyon field once it's activated?
 Very well. Energize the network.
 Acknowledged.
 (nods) They've probably been sitting there watching us for some time now.
 Not yet.
 On screen.
 Tasha?
 Then you believe her, Counselor?
 Besides, Tasha would have been a child when this woman was born.
 But why? What possible advantage do the Romulans think they would gain?
 (continuing) As it now stands, I don't see how this has any impact on our present strategy. We'll continue the blockade and leave the next move to them.
 Not at all. Is something wrong?
 I think the Romulans have created what they hope will be a distraction... something to keep us off balance.
 The Enterprise C? It was lost... at the battle of Narendra Three... while defending a Klingon outpost from the Romulans.
 There were stories... that there might have been prisoners, taken back to Romulus. But those were just rumors.
 Guinan... that was twenty-three years ago... Tasha was still a child...
 How could you know these things?
 Tasha died... a year before you came to the Enterprise. You never met her.
 If you have nothing more than a vague intuition...
 I think... it's time I met Commander Sela.
 I'm afraid you misinterpret our presence here. I want to reassure you that we have no hostile intentions.
 It is most certainly our intent to prevent any external power from interfering in Klingon affairs.
 Then why not send your ships across?
 All right. Why did I invite you?
 It's been suggested that Tasha was aboard the Enterprise-C when it was destroyed twenty-four years ago. She was one of the survivors. You are obviously the product of a union between her and a Romulan.
 And yet you claim that it is possible -- that Tasha Yar was your mother.
 I want to meet her.
 Your mother. Is she still alive?
 Doubts? I'm full of them. Nothing in my experience can assure me that what you say is true... but I do know one thing: it will not affect my judgment in our next encounter.
 In thirteen hours we will be forced to either withdraw from the border or fight the Romulan fleet. Neither of those alternatives is acceptable. We must expose their involvement before the deadline.
 If you launch a massive attack now, the Duras forces will need supplies... Lursa and B'Etor will call for help... the Romulans will try to run the blockade... and we'll be ready for them.
 When Gowron begins his attack, we'll make our move. (points to display) The Excalibur will fall back with "engine problems." You will take the Hornet and the Akagi to this position... which will open a small gap in our detection net.
 Exactly. (indicating display) But when they try to send their ships through, the Enterprise and the Tian Nan Men will swing around, close the gap and catch them in the act.
 Good luck, Will.
 Signal the fleet to stand by.
 Open a channel to the Sutherland.
 We're reading a disruption of the tachyon net in your area.
 That's where they're going through. (beat) Send a signal to the fleet... all ships to fall back and rendezvous at Gamma Eridon. We'll try to reestablish the net before they get there.
 Hail the Sutherland.
 Mister Data, you were ordered to rendezvous with the fleet at Gamma Eridon. Acknowledge.
 Captain's personal log, supplemental. It is with a profound sense of relief that I have ordered the fleet back to Federation territory following the news of Gowron's victory.
 (continuing) We have arrived at the Klingon Home World, where I will present the High Council with a full report on our encounter with the Romulans. (MORE)
 (beat) I am also... anxious to learn of Worf's fate.
 Come.
 No, they can't. (thoughtful beat) However... the excuse "I was only following orders" is the epitaph of too many tragedies in our history. Starfleet does not want officers who will blindly follow orders without analyzing the situation. (beat) Your actions were appropriate for the circumstance, and I have noted that in your record.
 Mister Data...
 (less formal) Nicely done.
 Granted.
 Captain's log, stardate 45047.2. The Enterprise is en route to an uninhabited planet in the El-Adrel system. The location is mid-way between Federation space and the territory occupied by an enigmatic race known as "The Children of Tama."
 at warp. A schematic of a Tamarian spacecraft is displayed at Data's end of the table.
 The Tamarians apparently arrived at El-Adrel Four nearly three weeks ago. They've been transmitting a subspace signal toward Federation space ever since.
 Apparently so. Starfleet believes their presence is an attempt to start a dialogue. (to Data) Commander.
 Agreed. I appreciate your prudence, Lieutenant Worf. But given the evidence, Starfleet has arrived at a reasonable conclusion. The Tamarians have extended a hand -- we must do the same.
 As have I, Number One.
 (continuing) Are they truly "incomprehensible"? In my experience, communication is a function of patience and imagination. I'd like to think we have both qualities in sufficient measure.
 Counselor...
 Data?
 But what does it all mean?
 (to screen) Captain, I invite you to consider the creation of a mutual non-aggression pact between our two peoples. Possibly leading to a trade agreement and cultural interchange. Does this sound like a reasonable course of action?
 Impressions, Number One.
 As are we. For what it's worth.
 (re: the weapon) You expect me to fight -- is that it? A challenge?
 I don't know who or what Darmok and Jalad are. But I didn't come here to start a war.
 I refuse.
 (continuing) Would you attack an unarmed man, Captain? There's not much of a challenge in that.
 (shakes head) I'm sorry, Captain.
 "Shaka" indeed.
 (continuing) What now, Captain? Will you attack me in my sleep?
 (exaggerating) If I don't freeze to death first...
 Picard of the Federation.
 (continuing) Of the starship Enterprise... Of the planet Earth...
 (continuing) Temba? What do you mean? Fire? Temba means fire?
 Temba is a person? His arms are wide. Because he's holding them apart? In generosity? In giving? In taking?
 Thank you. (indicates branch) Thank you.
 (to himself) Where have you gone to, my friend?
 (to himself) Forgive the intrusion, Captain. But I need some answers.
 (to himself) A captain's log... ?
 (indicating campsite) I was curious. I meant no harm.
 --Enough! I'm not going to fight you. You'll just have to---
 I'll go along with that.
 Come on.
 Shaka... You said that before. When I couldn't build a fire. A failure? An inability to do something?
 -- at Tanagra.
 (continuing) I remember the words. But I don't understand...
 At Lashmir. Was it like this at Lashmir? Similar to what we're facing now?
 (excited) A strategy? With fist open...
 (continuing) With fist open. Why... ? To lure the enemy...
 (closing his fist) With fist closed. An army. Open... to lure the enemy. (MORE)
 Then closed... To attack. That's how you communicate, isn't it? By citing example. By metaphor. (indicating creature) Uzani's army. With fist closed!
 No --
 (nodding) ... when the walls fell.
 Our situation is similar to theirs. I understand. But I need to know more. Tell me more. About Darmok and Jalad. Tell me...
 (continuing) You used the words "Temba. His arms wide" when you gave me the fire. And the dagger. Could that mean give? (pointing to Dathon) Temba. His arms wide. Darmok. Give me more about Darmok.
 (indicating stone) Darmok.
 (indicating circle) The ocean.
 (continuing) "Darmok on the ocean."
 (continuing) A metaphor. For being alone? Isolated? "Darmok on the ocean."
 (standing) Are you alright?
 (indicating Dathon) Temba. His arms wide. Give me more. "Darmok on the ocean... "
 "At Tanagra." A country? "Tanagra on the ocean." An island. (a "more" motion) Temba... His arms wide.
 "Jalad at Tanagra." He went to the same island as Darmok. To Tanagra.
 The beast. A creature on the island? On Tanagra. Darmok and Jalad -- did they fight the beast?
 (continuing) They arrived separately. They struggled against a common foe. (beat) "The beast at Tanagra. Darmok and Jalad."
 (realizing) They left together.
 (continuing) Darmok and Jalad on the ocean.
 You hoped this would happen, didn't you? You knew there was a dangerous creature on this planet. And you knew from the tale of Darmok that danger shared can sometimes bring two people together. (indicating situation) Darmok and Jalad at Tanagra. You and me, here -- at El-Adrel.
 (realizing) My turn? I'm afraid I'm not much of a story teller. And you wouldn't understand me anyway. (shakes head) Shaka... when the walls fell.
 (continuing) Perhaps that doesn't matter. You want to hear it anyway...
 (continuing) There is a story... A very ancient one. From Earth. I'll try to remember...
 Gilgamesh. Was a king. At Uruk. He tormented his subjects. He drove them to anger. They cried out -- "Give our king a companion. Spare us his madness."
 (continuing) Enkidu. A wildman. Of the forest. Entered the city. They fought in the temple. They fought in the street. Gilgamesh defeated Enkidu. They became friends. (beat) Gilgamesh and Enkidu. At Uruk.
 (quiet) The new friends went into the desert, where the Great Bull of Heaven was killing men by the hundreds. Enkidu caught it by the tail, Gilgamesh struck it with his sword.
 They were victorious. But Enkidu fell to the ground. Struck down by the gods...
 (continuing; a whisper) And Gilgamesh wept bitter tears, saying, "He who was my companion through adventure and hardships, is gone forever... "
 I understand your sacrifice, Captain.
 (re: the roar) Unfortunately, if our friend out there has its way, no one will ever know what you tried to do...
 (as he moves) Hail the Tamarian ship.
 --Temarc!
 (continuing) The river Temarc. In winter.
 ... And Jalad. At Tanagra. Darmok and Jalad on the ocean.
 (continuing) The beast at Tanagra. Uzani. His army. (shaking his head) Shaka. When the walls fell.
 Temba. His arms open.
 (almost to himself) Thank you...
 I can't say, Number One.
 (continuing) But at least they're not new enemies.
 Come.
 Not at all, Number One. Please.
 Thank you.
 The Homeric Hymns. (glances up) One of the root metaphors of our own culture.
 (nodding) More familiarity with our own mythology might help us relate to theirs.
 The Tamarian was willing to risk all of us -- just for the hope of communication, of connection. And now the door's open between our peoples. That commitment meant more to him than his own life.
 (continuing) Would I do the same... ?
 (trying to be polite) Yes, well, one does not always have the luxury...
 (sighs) Whenever possible.
 (interrupting) Well, it looks very nice, Mot... that should suffice...
 (hits insignia, with an edge) Yes?
 (to com) Lay in a new course. I'm on my way.
 Report.
 Hail them on upper and lower band frequencies, Mister Worf...
 Time to the Solarion system?
 I understand you've been discussing alternative adversarial engagement strategies with Mot.
 Open the channel.
 Captain's log, stardate 45076.3. We have arrived at Lya Station Alpha with survivors from Solarion Four. Admiral Kennelly has rendezvoused to discuss the Bajoran terrorist attack.
 (to com) Ginger tea with honey, very hot.
 My Aunt Rebecca's cure for the common cold.
 Did the liaison have anything to say about the attack?
 But in forty years, the Bajorans have never attacked a Federation target...
 And our response?
 (acknowledges) On many worlds we've been to, they are isolated, treated as pariahs...
 That could be done through diplomatic channels, Admiral... what do you really want from us?
 Any way I can...
 And what do I have to offer that might persuade him to cooperate?
 (not nearly adequate) Admiral...
 They have endured generations of sympathy and promises. I cannot believe this Orta will be satisfied with more of the same.
 (to com) Go ahead.
 Negative...
 Ro Laren? From the Wellington?
 (re: the Admiral) Stand by, Commander.
 Admiral... respectfully... (beat, trying to fashion a polite way of saying this) I would appreciate some consulting rights on the assignment of a new officer... especially someone with the record of Ro Laren...
 There are other Bajorans in Starfleet... assign one of them...
 After what happened at Garon Two, she has no business serving on any starship as far as I'm concerned... let alone the flagship, my ship...
 It's that important to you...
 Picard to Riker.
 Proceed with the transport.
 I'll fill you in later, Commander.
 Admiral, I hope neither of us regrets this.
 (even) Aunt Rebecca would be pleased.
 They'll have to learn to live with it.
 I would expect nothing less.
 It won't be for long, Will.
 Come.
 Yes, Ensign Laren, please have a seat...
 I beg your pardon?
 (glances at Riker) I'm sorry, I didn't...
 I wish to be candid with you, Ensign.
 I am fully aware of your Starfleet record, your problems on other ships, the incident on Garon Two that led to your court martial. I feel it only fair to inform you that I am personally concerned about your presence on this most critical mission...
 Nevertheless... (beat) ... we are going to be serving together and I think it would be wise for Commander Riker and me to clearly voice our expectations and...
 Dismissed.
 Captain's log, supplemental. We are approaching the Valo system on the outskirts of Cardassian territory, where many Bajorans have resettled.
 What can you tell us about him, Doctor?
 (acknowledges) That is not a small advantage on this mission... Very well... Mister Data, contact Holza, arrange a meeting... set a course for Valo Three.
 (controlled) Well. Let us hope you are mistaken, Ensign. Now... perhaps you could point us in the right direction as Mister Data suggested.
 Captain's log, supplemental. I read about the achievements of the ancient Bajoran civilization in my fifth grade reader... they were architects and artists and builders and philosophers... when humans were not yet standing erect.
 Now I see how history has rewarded them...
 Thank you for meeting with us, Mister Keeve.
 Ensign Ro has educated me.
 Do you know where we can find Orta?
 Might you be able to help us locate him?
 Then I don't understand why you are unwilling...
 We were saddened by those events... but they occurred within the designated borders of the Cardassian Empire...
 I'm not here to debate Federation policy. I am prepared to offer assistance...
 We have had our own problems with the Cardassians... now that there is a treaty, we are in a position to help. Your people have been forced to resettle all over the quadrant. We can make a legitimate case with the Cardassians that this is no longer an isolated problem. We will work diplomatically on your behalf... but first the terrorist attacks must end.
 Mister Data -- see to it that our replicators provide blankets for every man, woman and child here before nightfall.
 Mister Worf, you will determine if these people have any other emergency needs and provide whatever we can...
 You were helpful.
 In an age when their technology should be able to feed and clothe all of them... that they should have to live like this...
 Captain's log, stardate 45077.8. Keeve Falor has kept his promise and directed us toward the third moon of Valo One... where we will meet tomorrow with the terrorist leader, Orta.
 Any indications of weapons or vessels beneath the surface?
 ... which is very likely why they chose this moon for their base of operations...
 (keys insignia) Captain Picard to Ensign Ro.
 (frowns) Mister Collins, any activity at the designated site of our meeting...
 Prepare to transport us to the same location Ensign Ro beamed to... Mister Worf, phasers...
 See if we can determine their direction... Standard search pattern...
 
 Abducting us was not necessary.
 Then she has done us both a disservice. For I am committed to peace.
 Ensign, whatever your motives, you have already done enough damage to these negotiations. With your permission, Orta, I will have her transported back to my ship.
 (losing patience, to Orta) There will be no bloodshed...
 Perhaps you could share them with me.
 If you wish her to remain, I will agree, but she is not helping matters by fostering distrust between us...
 I can assure you....
 Deception?
 Yes...
 (interrupting) Ensign. May I see you in my ready room?
 You do not leave this ship without authorization.
 This is not a discussion. You're restricted to your quarters for the remainder of the mission.
 Dismissed.
 Come.
 Ensign Ro has been confined to her quarters.
 Guinan, I don't know why you are involved in this, but...
 I have found that Guinan is very selective about whom she calls a friend. (a beat) Sit down.
 What is it you can't do anymore, Ensign?
 That part I know.
 What kind of incentive... ?
 I find that... almost impossible to believe. To suggest that Admiral Kennelly would consider sending weapons to terrorists...
 You have been in contact with Admiral Kennelly during this mission?
 Arming these people would be a violation of all that the Federation stands for. You cannot be blind to that...
 Have you made this offer to Orta?
 That was a wise choice, Ensign. It probably saved you from another court martial.
 Have you briefed Admiral Kennelly since our return from the surface?
 Then why did you come to me?
 It seems we find ourselves with... something in common. (a thoughtful beat) Do you think Orta would cooperate with us to determine the truth here?
 Good. (beat) Our orders were to find him, bring him back to the camps... any way we could... perhaps that is exactly what we should do.
 And then watch what happens.
 Captain's log, supplemental. I have become convinced that we are somehow involved in a conspiracy. I am hopeful the purpose behind it will be revealed in the next few hours.
 It was a team effort, Admiral. Ensign Ro proved invaluable.
 The Enterprise will escort a Bajoran Antares-class carrier to the Valo Three camp at oh-five hundred hours... Orta and his people will be aboard.
 Acknowledged. (beat) How's that Cardassian virus, Admiral?
 Good. We will report as soon as our mission is accomplished. Picard out.
 Mister Data...
 (thoughtful) Keep an eye on the Cardassian border, will you?
 On screen.
 Hail them, Mister Worf...
 This is Captain Picard, we are prepared to escort you to Valo Three...
 Ensign Ro, set a course for Valo Three... half impulse.
 Engage.
 Mister Worf, can you identify the class of these ships?
 Yellow alert. Continue to monitor them...
 That's where it will be.
 Ensign Ro... change course to intercept the Cardassians... open channel to the Bajoran vessels...
 This is the Enterprise. We are moving to intercept two Cardassian warships... maintain your present course and speed.
 On screen.
 Open a channel, Mister Worf.
 I am Jean-Luc Picard of the Federation Starship Enterprise... how can I help you?
 I'm pleased to hear that, Gul Dolak, for all of us in the Federation value the peaceful relations with our Cardassian neighbors.
 Good. Now that we've established our mutual good will... what's on your mind?
 Terrorist carrier... are you certain?
 Well, rest assured, there will be no terrorist attacks today. We are escorting these Bajoran settlers to the camp on Valor Three. You may monitor their course if you wish.
 This is neutral space, Gul Dolak. You have no jurisdiction here.
 If we withdraw, what do you intend to do to the Bajoran vessel?
 I see. Well, that puts me in a difficult position. I've promised to escort these people to their camps.
 (beat) I'm sorry to offend you, Gul Dolak. But I cannot withdraw.
 Is that intended as a threat?
 Advise Starfleet of our status, Mister Data. (beat, rising) When Admiral Kennelly calls, I'll speak to him in my ready room.
 It seemed, Admiral, that they knew our course, our destination, our plan...
 I'm not convinced of that...
 Any suggestions, Admiral?
 Sir, I see no way to protect the Cardassian peace without sacrificing the Bajorans.
 No. I'm not willing to give them up.
 Well, I just see a different big picture, Admiral... it looks something like this... (beat) I see the Cardassian liaison, with his Cardassian virus, coming to meet with you after the attack on Solarion Four. Now, we have a mutual enemy, he says. The Bajoran terrorists. The Cardassians can't find them. But maybe the Federation can. I am beginning to see that our mission has been, in fact, to expose Orta... so the Cardassians could move in and destroy him.
 Ensign Ro, set a course, bearing one-eight-seven mark one-zero-two... one quarter impulse.
 Hold present course.
 On screen.
 No. Here. On screen.
 The Cardassians have destroyed the Bajoran ship.
 No, sir.
 No, sir. No one was on board.
 The ship was controlled from the ground. Communications were handled through a subspace relay aboard the vessel.
 Actually, no... this was Ensign Ro's idea... but I fully endorsed it. I suspected that something like this might occur.
 I am more concerned with protecting the honor and integrity of Starfleet.
 The Bajorans did not attack Solarion Four.
 Yes.
 Admiral, Orta's ships are old and obsolete. They do not have warp capabilities. They could not have reached another star system... let alone attack one.
 I would suggest you ask your friend the Cardassian liaison, Admiral. The only explanation I can think of is that the Cardassians staged it.
 Perhaps they were hoping to find someone in Starfleet like you, Admiral, who would be foolish enough to solve their Bajoran problem for them.
 I'm not sure. A hearing, definitely. Perhaps a court martial.
 A few weeks. We have some surveying to do in sector two-one-three-oh-five.
 Ensign, you were recruited for one mission and if you wish to be relieved of further duty, I will approve it. But I'd like you to consider remaining in Starfleet.
 It would be a shame for Starfleet to lose someone with your potential.
 That can change.
 I've observed a certain quality about you that... might be harnessed, molded...
 There's still a lot you can learn from Starfleet, Ensign.
 (beat) That is an attitude I have found to be common among the best officers I've served with. (beat) You are not one of those officers, Ensign, but you might be someday... if you decide to work at it.
 Condition... ?
 Picard to Enterprise. Two to beam up.
 SUPERNUMERARIES.
 What kind of disturbance?
 See if you can make contact with the colony...
 How far are we?
 Bridge to La Forge...
 Are you picking up readings from Melona?
 Ensign... increase to warp eight.
 Continue hailing the colony. All channels.
 I know, Counselor.
 Ensign, increase to warp nine. (to Worf) How long, Mister Worf?
 Captain's log, stardate 45122.3. We have notified Starfleet Command of our intention to pursue and investigate the Crystalline Entity. To that end, we have been joined...
 ... by Doctor Kila Marr, a xenologist who has made studying the Entity her life's work.
 Of course.
 Commander Data, you will accompany the Doctor to the surface.
 There is no one on this ship who is more knowledgeable of the Crystalline Entity than Commander Data. His birthplace was Omicron Theta.
 If there are others you wish to have on your team, you are, of course, welcome to request their additional presence. (beat) But as captain, I think it is in the best interest of this investigation for you and Commander Data to work together.
 Well?
 If her discomfort is going to cloud her judgement... or preclude her doing her objective best... I want to find it out now.
 Can you project a course from it?
 Is either populated?
 Ensign, set a course.
 Reprogram the torpedoes, Mister Worf. (to Marr) Let's just hope we don't have to use them.
 If it's possible to avoid firing on it, I would hope that --
 Perhaps you should join me in my ready room.
 We are not hunters, Doctor. Nor is it our role to exact revenge.
 I'm not denying that it might become necessary to fire on it. But that would be a last resort.
 I'm going to try to talk to it.
 We know through our own experience that our shields will protect us from the Entity. As long as we are in no danger, I will make every effort to communicate.
 If we can determine what its needs are, we might find other sources to supply it...
 The sperm whale on Earth devours millions of cuttlefish as it prowls the ocean. It is not evil... it is simply feeding. The same may well be true of the Crystalline Entity.
 There are those, Doctor, who would argue that the Crystalline Entity has as much right to be here as we do.
 Mister Data has some theories about how to communicate with the Entity. Please confer with him.
 A distress call... from a ship called the Kallisko... it's being pursued by an unknown object.
 How strong are your shields, Captain?
 Do you carry weapons?
 Kallisko, change course, take evasive action. Do whatever you can to outrun it.
 Mister Worf... can you reestablish?
 Set a course for the Kallisko. Mister Riker, prepare an away team... I want you to check for survivors.
 We don't want to take the time now. Send a message to the nearest starbase to dispatch a crew.
 Mister La Forge, make certain we are still picking up the gamma radiation pattern of the Entity.
 (to Doctor Marr) Have you and Commander Data made any progress in finding a means of communication?
 Then please keep working. We may need it soon.
 Come.
 Very well.
 One more thing...
 Starfleet will notify Carmen Davila's family of her death and return her personal effects. Would you care to include a letter?
 Something more, Number One?
 Of course.
 And why do you think that?
 Are you sure that's it? Or are you being influenced by personal feelings?
 Captain's Log, stardate 45125.7. We are still in pursuit of the Crystalline Entity. Data and Doctor Marr are prepared to attempt communication with the being when we intercept it. I will admit to some uncertainty about the prospect... it could prove to be a scientific triumph... or a catastrophe.
 Make it so.
 Full stop. Doctor Marr, continue emitting your signal. On screen, Mister Worf.
 Possibly... just as we are checking it out.
 Remarkable...
 It's trying to communicate with us?
 Then it's possible... communication... understanding...
 Return to the intermittent signal, Doctor...
 Counselor... ?
 Doctor, stop the transmission! That is an order --
 Mister Worf, take charge of the Doctor. Mister Data, shut down that transmission.
 Mister Worf... escort Doctor Marr to her quarters.
 Fine. But do not leave her unattended.
 Captain's Log, stardate 45156.1. Our mission to Mudor Five has been completed and since our next assignment will not begin for several days, we are enjoying a welcome respite from our duties.
 Hello.
 I'm afraid not. (trying to make it sound fun) But... we will be visiting both the hydroponics and astrophysics laboratories.
 Well. If you'll come with me...
 I want you all to know that we on the Enterprise are very proud of the science fair winners. Perhaps some of you will choose to pursue a career in Starfleet. I heartily urge you to do so.
 Well, then. Ah... what did you do for your science projects?
 I see. Very commendable. (to Jay Gordon) And you?
 How interesting. And you --
 (urgent) Hang on -- we're falling!
 (very hoarse) Are you... (tries to clear throat, then louder) Are you children all right?
 Picard to bridge. (beat) This is the captain. Can anyone hear me?
 I don't know.
 (firm) They're not dead. Communications are down, that's all.
 We most certainly are not --
 (firm) Listen to me!
 (continuing) No one is going to die. The bridge will send a rescue party as soon as possible, so I want you to stop crying. Everything is going to be all right.
 The external power has been cut off.
 I don't know.
 Your name... is Marissa. Is that right?
 How old are you?
 Really? And the boys?
 Well, I'm going to need a first officer to help me. You're the oldest... so that makes you Number One.
 That's what I've always called my first officer. Here.
 Now... we need a crew to help us get that hatch off.
 Number One... I think Jay might make an excellent science officer. Don't you agree?
 Will you join our crew, Jay?
 Of course. Forgive me. Jay Gordon.
 Let's see... your science project involved radishes, did it not?
 Excellent. You'll be our executive officer in charge of radishes.
 Now -- let's get to work.
 (strained) Feel around the edge of the illumination module -- of the big circle, until you find a small knob.
 Now with your other hand, reach around the far side of the module... there should be another knob.
 Good. Good. Pull both knobs out at the same time and then let go.
 (continuing) Now push up... and slide the hatch over to the side.
 Jay Gordon, can you pull yourself up?
 Can you tell what deck we're on? There should be a large number on the wall of the shaft.
 Good. Now look down at the side of the lift. Do you see two big clamps?
 Can you see if both clamps are connected to a... long beam inside a... a big groove?
 All right. Come down.
 (softly) Number One, those big clamps are part of the emergency system. If something goes wrong, they're designed to hold the turbolift in place. (MORE)
 But they seem to have been damaged.
 That's right. (beat, then intimate) When that clamp gives way, we'll fall. You're going to have to take your crew out of here before that happens. There's a ladder along the inside of the turboshaft. You can use it to climb up until you find an open doorway.
 (honest) My leg is broken. I'll only slow you down and you need to move quickly. (a little firmly) You'll have to be the leader. That's an order.
 I'm not going. Commander Marissa is in charge.
 Patterson, you're an officer, now. You have to obey orders.
 There's no time to argue, you have to go now.
 All right. I'll try. But I want you to know... this is mutiny.
 (continuing) Number One, look at that panel... do you see a bright yellow cap?
 Pull the cap toward you and then turn it... it should come off.
 (continuing) Good. Now, that bundle of wires... that's optical cabling... see how much you can pull out...
 (to children) I can't open this door.
 (continuing) We'll have to climb up to the next deck.
 (firm) We're going up. Ready?
 (urgent) The lift's falling! Hang on!
 We're all right. We're going to keep climbing. Don't look down.
 (to Patterson) We're right here with you, Patterson. You're not going to fall.
 (continuing) Everything will be all right if you keep moving.
 (continuing) What we need -- is a climbing song. Marissa, what's a song you sing in school?
 I'm afraid I don't know that one. (beat) I know -- "Frere Jacques". We used to sing that when I was your age. Patterson, do you know that song?
 It goes like this... "Frere Jacques, Frere Jacques... "
 Captain's log, supplemental. We are en route to Starbase Sixty-seven, to undergo repairs. Life aboard the Enterprise is slowly returning to normal.
 Hello. It's good to see you again. What brings you to the bridge?
 Thank you, very much.
 And you did a wonderful job. Later this afternoon, we'll finish the tour I promised you. (beat) Starting with the battle bridge.
 I'll see you at fourteen hundred hours. (as he turns to go to the Ready Room) You have the bridge, Number One.
 Captain's log, stardate 45208.2. Commander Riker has rejoined the Enterprise from Risa. And we are on our way to an uncharted area called the Phoenix Cluster.
 VARIOUS CREWMEMBERS are working at the science stations. The bridge is alive with activity.
 (continuing) We are all anticipating this historic first look at the region.
 (nods; concerned) And on top of everything, there's been a change. We now have only two weeks to complete the exploration.
 Will, I'm leaving it up to you to make sure all science departments have an equal chance to complete their research.
 A bit of good news, as well. We're to rendezvous with a shuttlecraft carrying Wesley Crusher. He's on vacation from the Academy.
 Wesley...
 Quomodo tua Latinitas est? (How's your Latin?)
 Oppido bonum. (Very good.) Your Latin has improved.
 Walter Horne... is he still teaching?
 Is he still tending the grounds... or has age finally caught up with him?
 I got the very same tour...
 S-P...
 Oh... just an old acquaintance.
 (continuing) Wesley. If you meet someone whose initials you might want to carve into the elm tree, try not to let it interfere with your studies. (beat) I failed organic chemistry because of S-P.
 Go ahead, Doctor.
 On my way.
 What have you found?
 Agreed. Continue your analysis. Keep me informed.
 Captain's log, supplemental. We have arrived at the Phoenix Cluster, but it will take us several hours to determine the best possible location from which to conduct our survey. In the meantime, Commander Data's condition remains unchanged, with no further indication as to the cause of his breakdown.
 Come.
 No bother at all, Wesley, please...
 (continuing) How are the survey preparations coming along?
 Oh... why then?
 Yes, I've seen it.
 Addictive... What have you discovered?
 We'll start an investigation immediately. Thank you, Mister Crusher.
 (continuing) And Wesley...
 (continuing) Good to have you back.
 Advise them of our status, Mister Worf.
 Go replicate what you need. See that the devices are properly distributed.
 (continuing; an afterthought) And don't forget Mister Crusher.
 All senior officers report to the bridge. (beat) On screen.
 The Enterprise has been secured. We await your further instructions.
 We also have an opportunity to introduce the game to Starfleet Academy.
 Security alert, condition three. Computer, shut down all transporter systems and shuttle bays. (continuing) Mister La Forge?
 Seal off deck six. Activate security fields on section twenty- three through twenty-nine.
 Security to deck six, section twenty-five.
 You gave us quite a chase, Mister Crusher.
 (to Beverly) Doctor Crusher...
 Hold him steady.
 (a command) His eyes.
 I think so...
 On screen.
 The explanation is simple -- your attempt to capture this ship has failed.
 (to Data) And the rest of the crew?
 We'll take the alien vessel to the nearest Federation starbase. Ensign, lay in a course.
 Captain's log, stardate 45212.1. We have delivered the Ktarian vessel to Starbase Eighty-two. We are now on a course to rendezvous with the Starship Merrimack, which will take Wesley Crusher back to the Academy now that his vacation is over...
 That was to be my question for you, sir.
 On the contrary, Starfleet is most concerned. You are in a position to compromise the security of the Federation...
 That will not be satisfactory.
 And I cannot return without a full explanation. (beat) Ambassador, with the greatest respect for all you've achieved on behalf of the Federation, this sort of cowboy diplomacy is not easily tolerated any more...
 If you wish to undertake a mission with potential repercussions to the Federation, it is appropriate to discuss it with the Federation. I am here as their representative. You will have to discuss it with me.
 I also have the responsibility of bearing some unhappy news.
 It was an honor. He was a great man.
 I was with him before coming here. He expressed his pride in you, his love...
 No, the feelings were in his heart, Spock. He shared them with me. I know.
 Reunification... After so many centuries... so many fundamental differences that have evolved between your peoples...
 What is this "first step" that Pardek suggests... ?
 Why would you not bring something this important to the attention of your own people or the Federation?
 History is aware of the role you played, Ambassador.
 Ambassador, your logic escapes me. If I didn't know better, I would say your judgment had been influenced by emotion.
 I speak as a Starfleet officer and I cannot ignore the risks to you...
 Nevertheless, sir, I am not prepared to leave until your affairs are completed.
 Then, sir, I am in good company.
 Just how widespread is this movement?
 Serious enough for the leaders to suddenly embrace a Vulcan peace initiative? I have a difficult time accepting that.
 I will be the first to cheer when the Neutral Zone is abolished, sir. I only wonder if this movement is strong enough to reshape the entire Romulan political landscape.
 Hello, D'Tan...
 These people are no one's enemy, Senator.
 I can't imagine that one rises to the position of Senate Proconsul without the support of the Romulan traditionalists.
 Then, how can he turn his back on them so easily? How can he endorse reunification when it is considered subversive?
 Perhaps they are hoping to use this to expose members of your movement...
 That is not true...
 You let their emotions sway you...
 You are as skeptical as I am... is it logical to ignore your own good sense... ?
 That is the second time you have accused me of speaking with another man's voice. (beat) Yes, he will always be a part of me. His experiences. His spirit. But I speak with my own voice, Spock. Not his.
 Is it so important for you to win one last argument with him?
 (compassionate) Your fight with Sarek is over. And you have none with me.
 Even if it leads you into a Romulan trap...
 Have you had any success, Mister Data?
 I think I'll take this opportunity to remove my ears...
 And the Romulans are suddenly very interested in bonding with the Vulcans... Spock has been meeting with the new Senate Proconsul about reunification...
 The Proconsul says he is prepared to endorse peace talks...
 The Ambassador is skeptical but he cares a great deal about reunification. As long as there's a chance of success, he will pursue it.
 Neither do I, Counselor. (beat) How soon can you be at Galorndon Core, Number One... ?
 It may be a wild goose chase, but I don't think we have a choice, do you?
 We'll advise you further when you get there, Number One. Picard out.
 Can you access it, Data?
 Nothing else?
 (beat) I want to advise the Ambassador immediately... Mister Data, you will accompany me to the surface...
 Captain, maintain an emergency transport schedule at our beam-in coordinates...
 P'tah Jol Ginquol! Katah! You will lock on those coordinates at sixty minute intervals after our arrival.
 The only communication that was sent were the numbers one-four- zero-zero.
 A "peace" envoy in a stolen Vulcan ship...
 The moment those Vulcan ships appear in the Neutral Zone, the Enterprise will move to intercept...
 Can you possibly believe that the Federation will not immediately intervene?
 This will hardly convince anyone.
 Suggestions?
 (calling to o.c.) Well done, Mister Data... although I believe you parted Commander Riker's hair on the wrong side.
 Well done, Mister Data...
 What will you do now... ?
 The Federation will welcome that day.
 (reacts) Ambassador...
 I have learned it is useless to argue with you once your mind is set.
 (beat) Would you be surprised to learn that he found them equally valuable?
 Then, I would offer you the chance to touch what he shared with me...
 Captain's log, stardate 45233.1. Our terraforming mission to Doraf One has been suddenly cancelled and the Enterprise recalled to Starbase Two-thirty-four. Fleet Admiral Brackett would not discuss the matter on subspace for reasons she said would soon be clear...
 I will admit you've piqued my curiosity, Admiral.
 A defection?
 Captain's log, stardate 45236.4. As I study the intelligence reports on Ambassador Spock's disappearance, I cannot help but feel a deeper, more personal concern about this mission, for I know this man through his father. It was barely a year ago that I shared a mind meld with the Vulcan Sarek... now we must meet again as I attempt to find an explanation for his son's actions.
 Yes, yes, of course, you're right...
 We should notify Sarek's wife of our plans...
 And Sarek?
 (nods) Not unexpected. The man is dying. And I have the... honor... to bring him the news that his son may have betrayed the Federation.
 I met him only once... what I know of him comes from history books and of course the mind meld with his father...
 Not as much as you'd imagine... Sarek and Spock...
 ... Well, sometimes, fathers and sons...
 Oh there was one other thing... take a look at this...
 Something that turned up during the intelligence sweep... what do you make of it?
 And the crates they were in were marked as medical supplies.
 They've been sent to Vulcan for identification... Starfleet has requested we lend them a hand...
 Perrin...
 And you. How is Sarek?
 Then the disease has progressed...
 It must be very hard for you.
 I hope that will not be soon.
 I admire your strength more than I can tell you.
 Perrin... you know why I've come to Vulcan.
 I must ask you about Spock.
 Is it possible he was abducted?
 Do you have any idea why he might have disappeared like this?
 Would it be inappropriate to ask what happened between you and Spock?
 I was not aware that Sarek was offended by Spock's opposition...
 Would Sarek have any idea why Spock might have left?
 (gently) Perrin... would you allow me to see Sarek?
 Sarek, I have come a long way to see you.
 I must speak to you about your son...
 About Spock.
 Yes. He's missing.
 Yes, my friend.
 I need your help. I must find Spock.
 I know. He is reported on Romulus.
 That's what I hope to find out from you.
 Yes.
 Have you any idea what might have taken him to Romulus?
 Is there anyone on Romulus that he might know... or choose to contact?
 Who is Pardek?
 Who is Pardek?
 Pardek represented Romulus?
 It has been suggested... that Spock may have defected.
 But you believe he might be there to see Pardek...
 (not worth going into) I've heard of him.
 Do you know what business they could have together?
 (softly) Sarek, we are a part of each other. I know Spock has caused you pain... but I also know you love him...
 Peace and long life, Sarek.
 (whispering) ... and prosper.
 Captain's log, stardate 45240.1. To cross the Neutral Zone, I will require a cloaked ship. To that end, I have set a course for the Klingon Home World. After all we did for Gowron during the recent war, I am certain he will be happy to return a favor.
 Still no response from the Klingons, Mister Worf?
 He's ignoring me... what other explanation is there?
 (rather snappish) Yes, Lieutenant?
 I see.
 Victors re-write the history books. He can take every bit of credit, I'll gladly grant him that. But I need a ship. (frowns, a beat) If Gowron won't talk to me... get somebody who will, somebody on the High Council, K'Tal perhaps...
 That's all?
 Run it again.
 Call up the intelligence scan of Spock on Romulus...
 Same man... Pardek...
 One question answered. (beat) What do we know of him?
 (nods) I can see why Spock would cultivate a relationship with him.
 Where are we likely to find him -- other than on the floor of the Romulan Senate?
 Very good, Mister Data.
 Your resourcefulness never ceases to amaze me.
 If I ever get to Romulus, Data, I am going to need help. I'd like you to accompany me.
 Yes...
 I think Doctor Crusher can come up with something...
 Gowron or K'Tal?
 Name.
 On screen.
 Is he aware that we've been transmitting messages for three days?
 It is of the utmost importance that I speak with Gowron...
 A message. Very well.
 Tell Gowron, Leader of the High Council of the Klingon Empire, that his Arbiter of Succession, Jean-Luc Picard, needs a favor.
 I require a cloaked vessel.
 It is for a mission that could have repercussions throughout the quadrant.
 The only benefit to the Klingon Empire... would be our gratitude.
 Yes. And please add that if he is unable to provide a ship, I am sure there are others in the Klingon Empire who would be willing to help me. And then they would have our gratitude.
 Also please tell him that I am immensely gratified that he is prospering so well. It is a tribute to his skilled leadership.
 What about his skin color?
 (playfully) It is not...
 Anything from Gowron?
 Thirty minutes, Number One.
 You're certain it is Vulcan...
 (taps combadge) Yes, Lieutenant?
 Please convey our gratitude, Mister Worf. Advise the captain that Lieutenant Commander Data and I will be transporting aboard shortly.
 Agreed.
 That's right.
 I'm sorry. It is a confidential matter.
 (impassive) Defector...
 Your orders are to take us to a set of coordinates near Romulus... and to bring us back. That is all I am prepared to discuss.
 I realize that.
 Quite nice. Thank you.
 Of course. This will be fine.
 Good. I prefer it that way.
 I haven't had gagh in a while... been looking forward to it. Very fresh.
 Yes. I do.
 I'm sure the Klingons found it amusing to put us together in here.
 Very well, Mister Data. Thank you.
 I suppose so.
 Thank you.
 What are you doing?
 Not exactly...
 I see.
 No, no. Please go ahead.
 What are you looking at?
 But you're looking at me.
 I don't think so. Shall we continue to go over the files?
 Thank you, Captain.
 Sarek is dead.
 Well, Mister Data...
 (continuing) ... what do you think?
 Sarek and I shared a particular bond. Our lives touched in an unusual way... I admit that I feel the effects of his loss.
 (continuing) The tenor of our mission has changed, at least for me, Data. We were sent to confront Spock about his disappearance. Now, we must also tell him his father is dead.
 It is never quite that simple. Not even for a Vulcan. Certainly not for Spock who is also half Human. (beat) They spent a lifetime in conflict... now the chance to resolve all of their differences is gone.
 (acknowledges) Yes. It really is quite... illogical... (beat) A father and son... both proud, both stubborn... more alike than either would care to admit. They've spent a lifetime building emotional barriers. Those aren't easy to break down.
 And then the time comes when it is too late to try. One realizes that all the things he had planned to say will go unsaid. (beat) That is a difficult moment... and a lonely one. Spock will now have to face that moment.
 I have a good idea. (beat) We are ready to be transported to the surface.
 Where were they standing?
 Data...
 You're moving about in a very... well, android manner...
 And don't call me "Captain."
 Where?
 Not open for business yet...
 Very well, why don't we take the opportunity to try some of the local cuisine...
 Soup is fine.
 (friendly) Do you happen to know what time the intercessor's office across the way opens?
 (reacts) I need his services... he was recommended.
 (interrupting) We come from several kilometers outside the city...
 Madam, you are mistaken.
 We can't stay here long.
 I believe you're right...
 What? You've made a mistake...
 For what? Why have you brought us here?
 I have come on an urgent mission from the Federation. I am looking for Ambassador Spock.
 Captain's log, stardate 45333.3. The Enterprise is on its way to Penthara Four where a type C asteroid has struck an unpopulated continent.
 (continuing) The resulting dust cloud could very well create a phenomenon not unlike the nuclear winters of twenty-first-century Earth. Commander La Forge has begun work on a plan that would counteract the devastation.
 Commander Riker.
 Would you join me on the bridge, please.
 at various stations.
 Are you certain, Worf?
 A bit close for coincidence. (to com) Mister La Forge?
 Would a delay of an hour affect your plans?
 Thank you, Mister Data. (to Ensign) Prepare to come about, Ensign. Let's take a look at Mister Worf's distortion.
 The Lieutenant's sensors detected a temporal distortion, Number One, almost directly on our current course. There seems to be a small object back there that wasn't there a few moments ago.
 Full stop, Ensign.
 On screen.
 Lifesigns?
 Try hailing it.
 (get on with it) Yes, Mister Worf?
 (looks at Riker and then back at Worf) Reply that the Enterprise isn't going anywhere, Lieutenant.
 What are you trying to...
 Who are you?
 Really?
 And where exactly is it you come from?
 Exactly what kind of historian are you?
 You can't expect me to believe that the layout of my ready room is of interest to future historians...
 You flatter me Professor, but I can't help but wonder what could possibly have caused you to select me as the subject of your study. Even in this decade, there are far wiser and more experienced Humans both in and out of Starfleet.
 I realize it will be difficult, but we must all keep our questions regarding the future to ourselves. Professor...
 Mister Data, please show the Professor to his quarters.
 You know everything I do, Will.
 He is Human. Our medical scans have proved that. Haven't they, Doctor?
 And there was a temporal distortion back there, correct Mister Worf?
 And no one can deny that ship of his is unlike anything we've ever seen before.
 I appreciate your caution, Mister Worf. I share it. Have his vessel brought into a shuttlebay. Place it under guard.
 I realize this isn't going to be an easy visit for some of you. (MORE)
 Nevertheless, I've reviewed the Professor's credentials, and they're in order. So, I'd like you all to extend him every courtesy.
 Including questionnaires. Dismissed.
 Captain's log, stardate 45334.5. We have arrived at Penthara Four...
 (continuing) ... and can see for ourselves the atmospheric devastation caused by the asteroid impact.
 We've located three underground pockets of carbon dioxide... here, here and here. Our drilling phasers can release enough of the gas to form an envelope which would temporarily hold in the heat from the sun.
 We'll notify Doctor Moseley. Good luck, Geordi.
 Glad we could help, Doctor. The Enterprise will remain in orbit and continue to monitor your progress. Picard out.
 Mister Worf, return to a synchronous orbit.
 What kind of questions did he have for you, Number One?
 Location?
 Is La Forge still down there?
 Find him.
 Magnify.
 Are you alright?
 (to Moseley) What about the dust?
 The mantle is collapsing where the pressure was released.
 Sort them out, Commander.
 And look what we've done.
 The good news.
 That would be like striking a spark in a room filled with gas.
 Turn the Enterprise into a lightning rod.
 And what about the bad news, Data?
 Meaning?
 Captain's log, supplemental. While Doctor Moseley takes La Forge's plan to the leaders of the colony, I find myself weighing the potential consequences of a more philosophical issue.
 (not turning) Come.
 I would imagine you know why I've asked you here.
 I'm faced with a dilemma. There's a planet beneath us that is slowly turning to ice. If we don't do something about it, I'm told that within weeks, thousands, perhaps tens of thousands, will die.
 (turning to Rasmussen) Yes, it would. It would be quite a shame.
 Mister La Forge has a possible solution. The margin of error is extremely critical, but if it's successful, there's no more threat.
 Every living thing on the planet will perish.
 (speaking hypothetically -- he's not asking) Not if you were to help me.
 No, I'm not. Everything Starfleet stands for, everything I've ever believed in, tells me I can't ask you that. (pause) But at the same time, there are twenty million lives down there, and you know what happened to them... what will happen to them.
 I have never been afraid to reevaluate my convictions, Professor. Right now, I have twenty million reasons to do so.
 Your presence potentially gives me access to a kind of information that was never available to me before. An additional tool, a new weapon in my armory... you, Professor. If I'm going to reexamine my beliefs, I must take advantage of every possible asset. It would be irresponsible of me not to have you here.
 How can you be? How can you be "comfortable" watching people die?
 (interrupting) I know, Professor, "What if one of those lives I save down there is a child who grows up to be the next Adolf Hitler or Khan Singh?" (MORE)
 First year philosophy students have been asked that question ever since the earliest wormholes were discovered. But this is not a class in temporal logic... It's not hypothetical, it's real. Can't you see that?
 I have two choices. Either way, one version or another of history will wend its way forward. The history you know or another one. Who's to say which is better? All I know here, today, is that one way, millions of lives could be saved. Isn't that incentive enough?
 We have a Prime Directive, Professor, which tells us we have no right to interfere with the natural evolution of alien worlds. (MORE)
 But even though I am sworn to uphold it, I have disregarded that directive on more than one occasion... When I knew it was the right thing to do. If you are holding true to some "temporal" equivalent of that directive, isn't there a possibility that this is an occasion for you to make an exception, to help me choose... because it's the right thing to do?
 Every choice we make allows us to manipulate the future. Do I ask Marie or Suzanne to the spring dance? Do I take my holiday on Tahiti or on Risa? A man's life, his future, hinges on each of a thousand choices. Living is making choices. (MORE)
 Now you ask me to believe that if I make a choice other than the one found in your history books, it could irreparably alter your past! Well, perhaps I don't give a damn about your past, Professor Rasmussen. Because your past is my future and as far as I'm concerned, it hasn't been written yet.
 (to Riker) How long will it take them to program the phasers, Number One?
 Quite the contrary, Professor. You've been quite helpful.
 By your refusing to assist me, I'm left with the same choice I began with; to try or not to try... to run the risk or to play it safe. But your arguments have reminded me how precious the right to choose can be... that right or wrong, the choice is mine. And since I've never been much for playing it safe... I choose to try.
 Program the firing sequence, Mister Data.
 Captain's log, stardate 45335.0. Doctor Moseley has met with the colony leaders, who all agree they are willing to take the risk.
 Geordi, it's time you return to the ship. (to com) Mister O'Brien, prepare to transport...
 (looking at the screen) Geordi, you know better than anyone that there's no guarantee this is going to work. And if it fails...
 Permission granted.
 Good luck, Commander.
 (tentatively) Mister La Forge?
 Report back to the ship when you're ready, Commander. (to Moseley) Doctor, we'll stay in orbit to analyze the remaining volcanic disturbances. (smiling) I think the best advice might be to let them cool down on their own.
 I'm afraid we're going to have to take a look in your vessel, Professor.
 A number of objects have turned up missing in the last few days. If they are in your possession, I would like them returned.
 (understanding) Because if I order Data never to divulge what he sees in there, he won't. (to Data) With the exception of anything that might belong to us.
 (mimicking Rasmussen in Act Four) Trying to make my history unfold in a way other than it already has, Professor?
 (still mimicking) Now what possible incentive could anyone offer me to allow that?
 (it's all coming into focus) Well, it's too bad you weren't a bit more inventive. If fewer things had disappeared, we might not have suspected you. As it was, our only stumbling block was your vessel. Our sensors couldn't penetrate it.
 (continuing) But as soon as the door opened, our computer was able to detect and deactivate everything you'd stolen... (holding up the phaser) ... including this.
 I'm sure there are more than a few legitimate historians at Starfleet who will be quite eager to meet a Human from your era.
 (continuing) Oh, and Professor...
 (continuing) Welcome to the twenty-fourth century.
 Captain's log, stardate 45376.3. We are approaching the planet Bilana Three, where a new method of propulsion known as the Soliton Wave is being developed. The Enterprise has been asked to participate in one of the first tests of this new technology.
 Come.
 I thought our meeting was at eleven hundred hours, Mister Worf.
 I see. (beat, then back to business) Several officers will be transferring aboard next week and I'd like to discuss making a few personnel changes---
 Personnel changes. I'd like you to consider transferring Ensign Rocha to phaser control and promoting Lieutenant---
 (holds up a hand) Mister Worf. (gently, with a hint of humor) You are not the first officer on this ship to have a new family member. Take care of your son. The personnel changes can wait.
 to DOCTOR JA'DAR. Dr. Ja'Dar is a middle-aged, humanoid alien who appears totally consumed by his work. Ja'Dar is pointing to the wall monitor upon which is a diagram of a SPACECRAFT in orbit around a PLANET.
 (impressed) Warp without warp drive...
 How will you end the experiment?
 Very well, Doctor. We'll contact you again once we've finished studying the mission specs.
 On screen.
 Mister Riker?
 (to Ja'Dar) The Enterprise is ready, Doctor.
 Doctor...
 (smiles) Good luck.
 (to Felton) Engage, Ensign.
 Bring us to twenty kilometers from the test ship, Ensign.
 (to Data) Is the wave having any effect on our own warp drive?
 Astonishing. (beat, then to Riker) Have science lab three begin a series of gamma emissions --
 Take us out of warp, all stop!
 (to Data) What happened to the test ship?
 On screen.
 We sustained some minor damage. Do you know what happened?
 We'll contact you as soon as the sensors are back on-line.
 Report.
 How do we stop it?
 Let's hear the second option.
 How fast is the wave travelling now?
 How much protection will our shields provide if we attempt to penetrate the wave?
 (on the move) It's the better choice. Number One, lay in a course for the soliton wave.
 Certainly.
 Mister Worf, I have not been dissatisfied with your performance.
 I realize that Klingon officers do not permit their children to live with them. (beat) However, since you first joined Starfleet, you've successfully met many challenges that were seemingly at odds with your Klingon heritage.
 (to Felton) Ensign, after we've passed through the wave, I want you to keep us at a relative position twenty-three kilometers in front of it.
 (to Felton) Take us to warp seven point two one.
 Stand by to increase speed to warp seven point three on my mark, Ensign.
 (to Felton) Engage.
 Report.
 Make it so---
 Seal off the compartment, prepare to vent the air from---
 (quickly, to com) Computer, identify the humanoid life-form in biolab four.
 (to com) Bridge to biolab four. Alexander, can you hear us?
 Data, how long until the wave overtakes us?
 Granted. Number One, accompany Mister Worf to biolab four.
 (to Riker) Commander.
 (firm) I can't let the soliton wave hit the colony. You have three minutes... not one second more.
 (to Tactical Officer) Stand by to fire torpedoes on my command.
 (to com) Picard to Commander Riker.
 Bridge to Lieutenant Worf, acknowledge.
 (frustrated) Commander Riker, acknowledge!
 (to Tactical Officer) Fire torpedoes.
 (urgent, to com) Picard to Riker.
 Captain's log, stardate 45400.3. Two days ago, Starbase Five-one-four lost contact with the research vessel Vico, which was sent to explore the interior of a Black Cluster. We are en route to investigate.
 
 Take us out of warp, Ensign.
 On screen.
 (nodding) One of the most ancient formations in the galaxy.
 (to Data) Structural status, Commander.
 Is it stable enough for an away team?
 (to Riker) Have transporter room one maintain a lock on each member of your away team. (MORE)
 I want you out of there at the first sign of trouble.
 Captain's log, supplemental. A young boy, shielded from our initial sensor scans, has been discovered alive by the away team. The degree of damage to the Vico is making our rescue attempt difficult...
 (to com) Transporter room one, can you lock onto him?
 And transport directly to sickbay?
 Acknowledged. (beat) Picard to Crusher.
 Standby for emergency transport.
 (to com) Picard to Commander Riker.
 Is the boy ready, Number One?
 At your signal.
 Captain's Log, supplemental. A thorough search of the Vico has revealed no additional survivors. Troi has begun the process of counseling the boy in regard to the tragedy.
 (re: datastream) How much longer until we can access their logs?
 The boy was here.
 And the boy's father?
 (grimly) Most likely...
 No sign of phaser burns on the hull.
 That's a strategy consistent with a cloaked vessel. Romulan. Or Klingon... But we're quite a distance from either of their territories.
 But what would they have been doing inside the Black Cluster?
 The boy described a boarding party, with helmets and phaser rifles.
 Counselor...
 Or he's lying.
 Why wouldn't he tell us the truth?
 Would Timothy also be more inclined to tell Data the truth about what happened?
 (to Data) Mister Data, proceed with the child as Counselor Troi suggests.
 Has the boy volunteered any further information?
 If there's any possibility of getting more from him, I'd like you to pursue it.
 Regardless, we need to continue our investigation. (beat, informing the room) We'll enter the cluster at oh-seven-hundred tomorrow morning. Dismissed.
 An android.
 How long will this behavior last?
 I assume this is not a time to confront him about what happened to his ship.
 Mister Data -- I'd like you to make Timothy the best android he can possibly be.
 Drop to one quarter impulse, Ensign.
 Take us to visual range, Ensign.
 Cancel Red Alert. Adjust the sensors to compensate for the distortion.
 Sensor difficulties have been reported by ships traveling through Black Clusters -- but not to this extreme.
 (to Felton) Resume previous course.
 (turning to Worf) Let's see if anyone's out there. Attempt a wide-range sensor sweep, Lieutenant Worf.
 (to com) Mister Data to the bridge, please.
 (to Worf) Adjust sensors to short range... attempt a limited positron scan...
 Mister Data, our sensors have been rendered ineffective by the field distortion. I want your analysis...
 (continuing) Mister Worf, fire phasers, maximum intensity, narrow spectrum, zero zero one mark zero four five.
 Exactly.
 Explanation, Mister Data.
 Our sensors and our phasers -- both useless. (to Data) This reflection phenomenon -- would it have the same effect on a disruptor-style weapon?
 And a ship's cloaking field?
 Mister Data, is it at all likely that the Vico was attacked inside the cluster?
 (to com) Picard to Troi.
 (to com) Please bring Timothy to my ready room.
 (gently) Timothy, can you tell us what happened to your ship?
 What didn't you mean to do, Timothy?
 Your computer had safety precautions. There's nothing you could have touched that would have damaged your ship.
 We're trying to determine what happened right now. And anything that you can remember that may assist...
 Ensign, full about -- go to warp two.
 Full shields.
 (to com) La Forge...
 (to com) Make it so.
 (to Worf) Drop the shields.
 If we had transferred all that warp power to the shields, it would've torn the ship apart.
 Full about, one quarter impulse. Take us out of here.
 Captain's log, stardate 45429.3. While on a mapping survey of sector two-two-one-three-nine, we are conveying a delegation of Ullians to Kaldra Four. These telepathic historians conduct their research by retrieving long-forgotten memories.
 Captain's log, supplemental. Reports of the Ullians' remarkable feats have piqued my interest. I have invited the senior staff to a Captain's Dinner in honor of our guests.
 Rather like the ancient oral historians of Earth.
 I'm sure. However, I don't think I'm a particularly good candidate --
 Yes, well...
 Mister Data?
 Captain's log, stardate 45430.9. Counselor Troi has fallen into a deep coma. After a thorough examination, Doctor Crusher has been unable to find any sign of illness or infection.
 (to Beverly) Can you bring her out of it?
 Who was the last person to speak with her?
 Commander, ask if they would consent to examinations -- just to be certain.
 Bridge to Commander Riker...
 Commander, do you read me? (beat) Picard to Commander Riker, answer please.
 Computer, locate Commander Riker.
 And Commander Riker?
 Then why discount the possibility that it's responsible for their comas?
 I believe it's premature to take that kind of action. We have no real evidence linking these comas to the Ullians.
 I mean no disrespect, sir. But we are faced with an alarming situation...
 Suspect is perhaps too strong a word. I am simply trying to determine what has caused two of my officers to fall into comas.
 In light of your particular telepathic abilities, it does raise the question...
 You shouldn't remember him like this.
 You don't have to do this...
 It's the least I can do...
 You shouldn't remember him like this.
 You shouldn't remember him like this...
 It's the least I can do...
 You don't have to do this...
 It's the least I can do...
 Did your scans provide any insights into these comas?
 Mister Data, I want you to investigate those eleven planets the Ullians have visited. See if there have been any reports of unexplained comas.
 In the meantime, we must consider restricting them to their quarters. As a precautionary measure...
 What else can we do? Station a guard? Set up a force field? I don't know if those would be any more effective...
 Picard here...
 I'm on my way.
 What's the last thing you do remember?
 And then... ?
 We were hoping you could tell us.
 You were the first. The next day Commander Riker fell into a similar coma... and last night -- Doctor Crusher.
 We aren't certain. (beat) It may be... that there is some unusual effect produced by the Ullians' telepathic activity.
 I'm going to talk to them. In the meantime, you're to stay here and recuperate. And if you remember anything about what happened to you... let me know immediately.
 That you voluntarily confine yourself to quarters. At least until we unravel this mystery.
 Please don't think of it that way.
 We have done everything we can think of to explain these comas. We've performed physical examinations and neurological scans... we have conducted a shipwide diagnostic, looking for viruses and parasites and infestations...
 We have investigated every possible cause we can imagine. And we have found nothing -- nothing -- to explain the comas.
 The only variable we cannot eliminate... is your presence on this ship. (beat) In light of these efforts, I ask you to understand my request. And to honor it.
 I know that.
 I am simply trying to consider all possibilities.
 If that is possible, of course.
 I'm sorry. But I cannot subject the Counselor to a potentially dangerous procedure.
 No...
 I will discuss the matter with the Counselor.
 Counselor, I want to reiterate... if you have any doubts about this procedure, you don't have to go through with it.
 Very well.
 Captain's log, stardate 45433.2. We have set a course for Starbase Four-forty, where the Ullians will disembark and return to their home planet.
 I'm not sure we have any legal basis for prosecution... memory invasion simply isn't a crime we've ever had to contend with.
 What would motivate someone like your father to commit such an act?
 Your father claims -- quite strenuously -- that he is innocent.
 This must be very hard for you.
 Picard to Data.
 How's your search coming?
 We'll want to inform the medical personnel on those planets that we have discovered the true nature of the comas. I'm sure they would appreciate knowing what really happened.
 Captain's log, stardate 45435.8. Doctor Crusher and Commander Riker regained consciousness while we were en route to the Ullian home world. The slow process of their recovery has begun.
 Earth was once a violent planet, too. At times, the chaos seemed to threaten the very fabric of life.
 Like you, we have evolved. We've learned to find better ways to handle our conflicts. (beat) But no one would deny that a seed of violence remains in every one of us. The potential for it is always there. We must learn to recognize it... because that violence is capable of consuming each of us. Just as it consumed your son.
 Captain's log, stardate 45470.1. The Enterprise has been diverted to the Moab sector to track a stellar core fragment of a disintegrated neutron star. Our science teams have been asked to monitor the planetary disruptions it may cause.
 Isn't that what we anticipated?
 Have you definitely established someone's inside it?
 (reacts) Human.
 Any starships ever reported missing in this sector, Data?
 Mister La Forge?
 Mister Worf, open the lower band frequencies that were most commonly used in the last century...
 This is Captain Jean-Luc Picard of the Federation Starship Enterprise. It is urgent that you respond.
 We mean you no harm. We must warn you that your planet is about to experience massive seismic disruptions due to an approaching stellar core fragment. No structure will be able to withstand them.
 On screen.
 Mister Conor, we were unaware of any Human colony in this system.
 The fragment will begin to have serious effects on your planet in six days.
 I'm afraid we're going to have to evacuate your people.
 Mister Conor, if you wish, we will find you another isolated planet that is safe.
 (with diplomacy) We will gladly explore the possibility with you, Mister Conor... would you care to come aboard to discuss it?
 We are capable of matter_energy transport...
 We can take you directly through the structure.
 (genial, inviting) May we arrange for your transport?
 Very good. Commander Riker and an away team will join you shortly. Picard out.
 (to Riker) Limit the away team to three people, Will...
 Captain's log, stardate 45472.8. Commander La Forge and Hannah Bates of the Genome Colony have spent nearly three days trying to find a way to adjust the path of the approaching core fragment. If they do not succeed in the next forty-eight hours, I see no alternative but to begin evacuation.
 You've spent a good deal of time on the surface, Counselor. How do you suggest we change their minds... ?
 (frowns) They've managed to turn a dubious scientific endeavor into dogma...
 It was a bad idea whose time passed long ago.
 They have given their humanity away to this genetic manipulation... many of the qualities they breed out -- the uncertainty, the self-discovery, the unknown - those are the very qualities that make Human life worth living... at least to me. I would not like to live with the knowledge that much of my future has been written, that my boundaries have been set. Would you?
 This leader of theirs, Conor, he seems like a reasonable man, doesn't he?
 (grunts) I'm sure. (beat) Will he leave when he sees there is no other choice?
 You admire him.
 Try at least to help him accept the reality of what may happen to his colony. If he makes the right decision, and he's as good a leader as he was "designed" to be... perhaps the others will follow him.
 What is the increase in efficiency?
 (to Hannah) Advise Mister Conor. Number One, brief the appropriate officers, prepare to transport them as soon as Conor approves...
 Captain's log, stardate 45474.6. Gravitational effects are being felt on Moab Four as fortification efforts continue. Meanwhile, the Enterprise has moved to a parallel course with the core fragment. (more)
 (continuing) We must adjust its trajectory by a minimum of one-point-two degrees to insure the colony's safety.
 Bring us within range of the fragment, Ensign...
 You may proceed, Commander La Forge.
 Mister La Forge...
 Now, Mister La Forge...
 Hail the colony.
 Success, Mister Conor. With the upgrades to your biosphere, the core fragment should no longer be a serious danger.
 Captain's log, supplemental. The stellar core fragment has passed safely out of the Moab system. The colony was shaken by powerful temblors but fortunately there were no injuries and only minor damage was reported.
 Asylum?
 I think, Doctor, that we may have "helped" these people too much already...
 (beat, thoughtful) Did we?
 Counselor, I think it is time you took me to meet Mister Conor.
 Transporter room three.
 Counselor... what is it you always say... ? "Take a deep breath"...
 I see.
 Yes... I think we all should have been more careful. That's becoming more clear by the moment. (beat) What is your status with him presently?
 Would you prefer not to return to the surface?
 I appreciate that.
 Deanna, every one of us went into this with the best intentions...
 And you didn't. And that's Human. We make mistakes. (not at all flip) Genetic manipulation or not -- nobody's perfect.
 Mister Conor, I believe you and I should talk.
 You made decisions that you felt would save your colony.
 We have both allowed this to happen, Conor.
 I wish I could see a way.
 If you force them to stay, you will be suppressing their Human rights.
 That is simplistic.
 I cannot ignore the requests of people, Humans who ask for transport away from here...
 You would have me make the decision for you, Connor. But I cannot. I am willing to talk to these people with you. I will urge them not to make an impulsive choice. But if they finally choose to leave, the Enterprise cannot turn them away...
 There is no question that our presence here has had an unintended influence on your society. That is done and there is no way to undo it now. But feelings are running high. Perhaps it's not such a bad idea to give yourselves adequate time to carefully weigh the consequences of what you are about to do. We are prepared to return in six months...
 In five days, you have seen only the most superficial evidence of what life is like outside your biosphere...
 What I would choose is not at issue...
 Enterprise, two to beam up.
 (nods) Make that one, Enterprise.
 Energize.
 Come.
 How many finally?
 If we ever needed a reminder of the importance of the Prime Directive, we have it now...
 Doesn't it? Our very presence damaged, perhaps destroyed, a way of life. (MORE)
 (beat) Whether or not we agree with that way of life... whether or not they are Human... is ultimately irrelevant, Number One. We are responsible.
 Yes. Of course we did. And I wish I could see any other course we could have taken. (beat) But I would submit, in the end, we proved ourselves just as dangerous to that colony as any stellar fragment could ever be.
 Captain's log, stardate 45494.2. We are investigating a series of subspace signals that may indicate intelligent life in the Epsilon Silar System. We will be within sensor range in three hours...
 console.
 On screen.
 Analysis, Mister Worf.
 Hail the vessel.
 No. We'll start this off with a show of good faith.
 Shields up.
 Take evasive action --
 What happened?
 (to Riker) Neither do I... I don't even remember who I am...
 But you still know how to work it.
 Clearly, we still possess certain skills -- we seem to know how to operate this vessel. But our identities have somehow been erased, or suppressed.
 Determining our command structure isn't crucial right now. Finding out who we are, and what we're doing out here is.
 If this presumption is correct, we may have sustained other damage. (to COM) Computer... status report.
 Can you give us a general status report?
 Do we have an onboard communication system?
 I suggest we use it. Our ship must have a crew. They may still have their memories.
 So far, our survey team has found no deaths or injuries among the crew. The shuttlecraft are operational, as are the transporters.
 I would recommend that before we prepare for combat, we try to access the ship's logs. Discover who we are and what our purpose here might be.
 The question is -- for what?
 We should run a complete diagnostic of all command systems.
 If we're going to trust our lives to these systems, we should make certain they aren't going to fail.
 Is it possible to bypass the normal pathways? To get at those memories in some other way?
 (to Beverly) The medical records will be our next priority.
 Commander MacDuff... Please see to it that all other officers who were listed report to the bridge.
 Your next priority is to retrieve any information you can regarding this ship's mission.
 Contact the operations officer to assist you.
 We're all doing the best we can in a difficult situation. Think nothing more of it.
 What do we know about this weapon?
 Commander, is there any record of our current mission?
 What are you suggesting?
 Commander MacDuff -- set a course for the Lysian Central Command.
 Ensign, take us out of warp. Three-quarters impulse.
 Mister Worf, maintain a continuous sensor sweep.
 Can you identify?
 On screen.
 (to Ro) Evasive maneuver sequence delta.
 (gesturing to hold up) Stand by.
 I'm aware of that, Commander. (to Data) Tactical analysis, Mister Data.
 Open a channel --
 (grimly) Return fire.
 Maintain our course, Ensign. Increase to three quarters impulse.
 (nods) Agreed.
 Doctor, the success of this mission would be far more likely if we had our memories back. Is there anything you can do?
 When can you start?
 Mister La Forge?
 Proceed.
 Doctor, is it absolutely necessary for you to see the medical files before you attempt a treatment?
 Enter.
 Yes, Commander. Sit down.
 I find myself with grave concerns about our mission.
 No. I have more fundamental doubts... (MORE)
 (beat) Whether or not this mission is justified.
 Orders which we cannot even verify.
 But I also can't ignore the fact that we greatly outclassed the only enemy vessel we've encountered. And that every possible shred of information which could shed some light on our situation has been conveniently eliminated.
 I feel as though I've been handed a weapon, pushed into a room and told to shoot a stranger.
 I need a moral context to justify that action. And I don't have one. I'm not satisfied simply following orders. I want to know that what I am doing is right.
 Decrease to one quarter impulse.
 Red Alert. Battle stations. Bring us to attack posture, Mister Worf.
 Tactical analysis, Mister Data.
 Forward shields on maximum. Lock phasers on the sentry pods and prepare to return fire.
 Full impulse. Take us straight through them.
 Load all torpedo bays. Ready phasers.
 Mister Data, scan for defenses.
 On screen.
 What are the defensive capabilities of the Central Command?
 (gesturing to hold up) Stand by.
 I do not fire on defenseless people.
 Mister Worf... open a channel to the Lysians.
 Captain's log, supplemental. We are on a course to Starbase Three- zero-one. Doctor Crusher has been working steadily, and has restored the memories of most of the crew.
 The Lysians have identified "Commander MacDuff" as a Satarran -- an alien race that's been at war with the Lysians for decades.
 I've conveyed to the Lysians our deepest regrets over the tragedy of their lost ship and crew. They've been extraordinarily understanding.
 Satarran weapons technology is no more advanced than the Lysians'. One photon torpedo would have ended their war.
 Captain's log, stardate 45571.2. We are going into orbit around an unexplored M-class moon of Mab-Bu Six. Though the moon was reported to be uninhabited, we have picked up a weak distress call.
 Any indications of life, Mister Worf?
 The Academy?
 Any record of missing ships in this vicinity, Data?
 Daedalus class...
 Mute it, Data.
 (to Riker) With the storm activity down there, I don't think it's worth the risk to check on a ghost ship, Number One... advise Starfleet we've solved the mystery of Captain Shumar and the Essex...
 Go ahead.
 Commander? Can you hear me?
 (completely fritzed) Enterprise to shuttle, please respond.
 Do you have their position?
 (urgent) Can you locate them...
 The same conditions won't permit a shuttle to land safely, Mister LaForge... any suggestions... ?
 (beat) Mister O'Brien... you are aware of the risks?
 Prepare to transport.
 (casual) Injury report, Doctor?
 Good work, Mister O'Brien.
 Are you sure, Number One?
 And how are you, Counselor?
 (to Riker) What happened down there?
 Did you find any evidence of life?
 (to com) Bridge. (beat) How do you suggest we proceed?
 Is there something wrong, Data?
 Of course, Counselor. (to Riker) Take the bridge, Number One.
 (reacts) Are you saying someone was communicating telepathically, Counselor?
 What were they trying to communicate?
 Report...
 Initiate emergency bulkheads in turboshaft four...
 (nods the order) Mister Worf...
 (reacts) Security to Ten Forward...
 Picard to Worf -- report.
 Mister Worf... acknowledge.
 Can you hear me, Lieutenant Worf?
 Mister La Forge, shut down all computer access in Ten Forward...
 How many people are down there?
 (to com) Doctor Crusher to the bridge...
 Doctor, go back to the biofilter readouts taken during the away team's transport from the moon's surface... see if you can come up with any kind of clue that might explain this...
 (to com) Ten Forward, this is Captain Picard. I am prepared to discuss this situation. There is no need for further violence...
 (continuing) Please identify yourself.
 Please respond, Ten Forward. Are there any members of my crew who require medical assistance?
 Move it where?
 And exactly what Troi asked me to do, but why? (beat) Ten Forward -- if you could be more specific about our intended destination, perhaps we could...
 (to Riker et al) We need to stabilize this situation and play for time. I suggest we move the ship as they have asked. Agreed?
 (to conn officer) Set the new heading. But take us there as slowly as you can... (nods to Ro to resume com) Ten Forward, we are moving the ship as you requested.
 If your theory is accurate, what would happen if we inflicted pain on the others...
 (to Geordi) How would you gain access?
 Yes, Doctor... that will be your top priority. (beat) Very well. Proceed.
 (to com) Bridge to Ten Forward. Now that we are moving the ship as you requested, I would like to know the nature of the injuries to members of my crew.
 How serious is their condition?
 Ten Forward -- those people must be released so they can receive proper medical treatment.
 If you release the wounded... (beat) I will take their place.
 (to Troi) Expect a medical team to accompany me.
 (to com) Picard to sickbay. Send an emergency medical team to meet me outside Ten Forward.
 As long as they're on board, I'm a hostage no matter where I am. We all are. I must find out who we are dealing with...
 If La Forge and Ro can attempt a rescue in short order, proceed with it. If they can't... I'll provide you with another opportunity. Watch for it.
 Ten Forward, we are outside the door.
 (measured) The Starship Essex vanished over two hundred years ago...
 You're telling me that you've survived this long as... (searching for the right  word)
 Then Counselor Troi is still... alive?
 I'm pleased to hear that.
 My help... ?
 How did this happen to you?
 Why didn't you tell us this? Why the deception, the violence?
 (beat) What was your vessel designation and complement?
 Under whose command in this sector?
 I do not need to see the records.
 End this now and I will do whatever I can to help you...
 What do you want?
 Impressions, Mister Worf?
 Yes, Human history is also full of similar legends.
 Not for a moment.
 (not really serious) ... then he should be on much better behavior, don't you think... ? A Starfleet Captain?
 Mister Worf, I assure you these are not Jat'yIn. Our job is to find out what they are... and then to determine how to deal with them...
 Captain Shumar...
 We will reach the polar position you requested in minutes... I will need to give additional instructions...
 (reacts) At the southern pole... ?
 (suspicious) Nothing our sensors were able to detect indicated that the Essex went down in the polar region...
 Let these people go... and I will order the bridge to follow your instructions.
 If you are who you say you are, there is no need for any of this... we will gladly take you home.
 If you do not release the hostages, I will not cooperate.
 Picard to bridge. Abort immediately.
 (beat, hoarse) Yes.
 On the contrary, we've had a difficult time with transport since our arrival... that's why we had to send down the shuttle. You should all be well aware of that fact.
 In fact, Chief O'Brien was the one who successfully executed the return of the away team... he is the most qualified on board to operate the transporter under these circumstances...
 (to O'Brien) I would be willing to grant you safe passage to the transporter pad in one of the cargo bays...
 I offer to grant you all safe passage.
 Because I assume if you go to the cargo bay, you will choose not to take all of the hostages. Their safety is my primary concern.
 Let me speak to him.
 Number One, I think we have an opportunity to end this seige...
 (continuing) But it will require cooperation from all concerned. Our guests will be moving shortly to cargo bay four, where the transport will occur. You are to ensure their safe passage from Ten Forward to the cargo bay.
 Captain Shumar, may I ask a foolish question?
 Nevertheless, I must ask how you intend to achieve your "rest"... when all is said and done...
 How do you intend to free yourself of this existence that has trapped your consciousness?
 Really? What is your scientific basis for that?
 Perhaps you will be required to perform a noble deed before you can rest.
 Surely you recall the old story of "The Canterville Ghost"...
 I would ask the same of you. (beat) When are you going to tell me who you really are?
 Escape?
 Did you really think using their identities would gain our sympathy... ?
 Then, this moon is a penal colony...
 Your threats are meaningless now.
 Are you prepared to sacrifice the lives of the others? Because they will all die when the hatch to the cargo bay is blown...
 And if you each know the officers you inhabit, you know they are equally ready to give their lives for this ship. (beat) Free them now... And I will return you to the moon's surface.
 (hits combadge) Picard to bridge, our guests will be leaving shortly... I need an emergency medical team here...
 Mister Worf, transport these... prisoners... back to the moon's surface...
 What about the entity that controlled you... what were your perceptions of him?
 Captain's log, stardate 45587.3. We are picking up a consignment of chlorinide from Starbase Twenty-seven for transportation to the Mylaira system. Once we have delivered this material, we will investigate reported subspace anomalies in the Kelnaria region.
 Doctor Crusher, please report to the bridge.
 ENTERS from a turbolift.
 Doctor, the transport ship Denver has struck a gravitic mine left over from the Cardassian war. They've sustained heavy damage.
 Make it so.
 Certainly, Number One. Mister Data, you have the bridge.
 I understand that Doctor Crusher believes he will never regain the use of his legs.
 That's a very... Human perspective, Will. But to any Klingon in Worf's position... life is over.
 If you were dying... terminally ill from a disease for which there was no cure... and the few remaining days of your life would be spent in pain. Don't you think that you might come to see death as... a release?
 (firm) You or I could learn to live with a disability of this kind. But to Worf... his life ended when those containers fell on him. We don't have to agree with it... we don't have to understand it... but we do have to respect his beliefs.
 He asked for your help because you're his friend. That means that you'll have to make your decision based on that friendship.
 I'm sorry, Will. I can't make this decision for you... but I can tell you that Klingons choose their friends with great care. If Worf didn't feel he could count on you... he never would have asked.
 Picard to Doctor Crusher.
 We've located the survivors from the Denver.
 Very well. We'll begin transporting the casualties aboard immediately. Bridge out.
 Doctor?
 I was on my way to look in on your patient.
 I understand you've relieved Doctor Russell of duty.
 Beverly... maybe you should consider letting her go ahead with the genetronic procedure.
 If he can't make a full recovery... Worf's going to kill himself.
 How long could you keep him like that? A week... a month... a year?
 But not all of it.
 He can't make the journey you're asking of him, Beverly. (beat) You want him to go from contemplating suicide to accepting his condition and living with the disability. But that's too far... the road in between covers a lifetime of values and beliefs... he can't do it.
 But perhaps he can come part of the way... maybe he can be persuaded to forgo the ritual... in order to take a chance at regaining the kind of life he needs. (beat) A Klingon may not be able to accept defeat... but he knows all about taking risks.
 If they were aware of all the circumstances in this case... don't you think it might affect their decision?
 It may not be good medicine... but for Worf, it may be the only choice.
 Good. (beat) I understand Mister La Forge has reported a minor fluctuation in the starboard warp coil.
 No.
 Captain's log, stardate 45614.6. We have been contacted by an androgynous race called the J'naii to investigate the disappearance of a shuttlecraft.
 J'naii, including SOREN and KRITE. The J'naii are a genderless species; Soren and Krite, like the others, possess no demonstrable sexual characteristics. All the J'naii look remarkably alike: strikingly attractive, with lithe, slim bodies and chiseled, delicate features. Soren is near Riker; Krite at an aft station.
 On screen.
 Long-range scan, Mister Data.
 Explanation?
 Make it so.
 Captain's log, supplemental. The sudden disappearance of our probe suggests that we may have found the first instance of what is called null space -- an anomaly which until now had been only theoretical. Commander Riker has been working around the clock with a team of J'naii specialists to formalize this hypothesis.
 Captain's log, stardate 45616.3. Commander Riker and the J'naii pilot have set out on a mission to chart the null space pocket. If they are successful, we can then proceed with a rescue attempt.
 Picard here...
 Proceed, Mister Data.
 Good hunting, Commander.
 We'd be happy to.
 Captain's log, stardate 45620.4. We remain in orbit of J'naii, charting the null pocket. We hope that a detailed map of the anomaly will prevent the loss of other ships.
 I could talk to Noor. Perhaps there's a way to work this out --
 Then I'm not sure there's much we can do.
 Will, if you've come here for sanction... to take matters into your own hands... I can't give it to you.
 Interfering in the internal matters of the J'naii is prohibited by the Prime Directive...
 If you violate it, you may be putting your career in jeopardy.
 Starfleet doesn't take these matters lightly... and I can't defend you if you go too far... (beat) Do you understand that?
 Will... don't risk everything you've worked for...
 How long to the Phelan system?
 Commander... ?
 Starfleet has just sent a message asking us to proceed to the Phelan system to negotiate a trade agreement.
 I wasn't sure when to tell them we'd be underway. (beat) Is our business with the J'naii finished?
 Very well. Ensign, take us out of orbit, set a course for the Phelan system. Warp six. (beat) Engage.
 (to com) All hands abandon ship. Repeat, all hands abandon --
 Captain's log, stardate 45652.1. The Enterprise has entered an area of space known as the Typhon Expanse. We are the first Starfleet vessel to chart this unexplored region.
 How so?
 Make it so.
 Yes, Doctor?
 Counselor?
 Go ahead.
 Report.
 Back us off, Ensign. Nice and slow.
 Hail them.
 Suggestions?
 Mister Worf -- make it so.
 (to com) All hands abandon ship. Repeat, all hands abandon --
 Captain's log, stardate 45652.1. The Enterprise has entered an area of space known as the Typhon Expanse. We are the first Starfleet vessel to chart this unexplored region.
 Yes, Doctor?
 (re: cup) My Aunt Adele cured a lot of sleepless nights with this steamed milk.
 Every time I get insomnia, I try to perfect the recipe.
 Earlier, when I was reading this book... I had the distinct feeling I'd read certain paragraphs before. (beat) I just assumed I'd read the book years ago and forgotten.
 Do you feel like we've had this conversation before?
 This could be nothing more than a restless night. But let's be sure... Call Geordi and Data. I want you to run a shipwide diagnostic, concentrating on the time and place you heard the voices. (beat) We'll discuss the results tomorrow at oh seven hundred hours.
 Thank Aunt Adele.
 Go ahead.
 Report.
 Back us off, Ensign. Nice and slow.
 Hail them.
 Suggestions?
 Mister Worf -- make it so.
 (to comm) All hands abandon ship. Repeat, all hands abandon --
 Captain's log, stardate 45652.1. The Enterprise has entered an area of space known as the Typhon Expanse. We are the first Starfleet vessel to chart this unexplored region.
 (to Beverly) You wanted to see me, Doctor?
 Yes... recently. While I was reading. Why do you ask?
 While you're at it, run a localized subspace scan to look for anything unusual.
 Keep me advised.
 If you are correct... how did it happen? How did we get here?
 Your point, Mister Data?
 ... hands abandon ship. Repeat, all hands abandon...
 If you're right about this... perhaps we could escape the loop by avoiding the collision...
 We can't afford to start second-guessing ourselves. We'll stay on our present course until we have reason to change it. (beat) In the meantime, let's do everything we can to avoid a collision.
 What do you suggest?
 Even with all these uncertainties, we've got to try. (to Geordi and Data) Take whatever steps are necessary to send a message. (beat) Dismissed.
 Back us off, Ensign. Nice and slow.
 Hail them.
 Suggestions?
 Mister Worf -- make it so.
 (to com) All hands abandon ship. Repeat, all hands abandon --
 Captain's log, stardate 45652.1. The Enterprise has entered an area of space known as the Typhon Expanse. We are the first Starfleet vessel to chart this unexplored region.
 Yes, Doctor?
 On my way.
 While you're at it, run a localized subspace scan to look for anything unusual.
 Keep me advised.
 ... hands abandon ship. Repeat, all hands abandon...
 If you're right about this... Perhaps we could escape the loop by avoiding the collision.
 We can't afford to start second-guessing ourselves. We'll stay on our present course until we have reason to change it. (beat) In the meantime, let's do everything we can to avoid a collision.
 If that were true... what could "three" indicate?
 Go ahead.
 Red Alert.
 Report.
 Back us off, Ensign. Nice and slow.
 Hail them.
 Suggestions?
 Mister Worf -- make it so.
 Data -- what happened?
 Mister Worf, end Red Alert. See if you can access a Federation time-base beacon. Find out how long we've been in this causality loop.
 Reset them, Mister Data.
 Open a channel.
 Captain Jean-Luc Picard of the Federation Starship Enterprise. We were just going to ask you the same thing.
 Have you any idea what just happened?
 The Enterprise has been caught in temporal causality loop. And I suspect something similar happened to you.
 Captain Bateson... do you know what year it is?
 Captain... perhaps you should beam aboard our ship. (beat) There's something we need to discuss.
 Captain's log, stardate 45703.9. We are en route to Earth, where it will be my pleasant duty to deliver this year's commencement address at Starfleet Academy. I'm also looking forward to seeing Wesley Crusher again. His flight team will perform a demonstration near Saturn that will be transmitted to the graduation ceremonies.
 at tactical, DATA at ops.
 Mister Data?
 (to Worf) Please inform the Academy and send my regards to Superintendant Brand.
 We've met a few times. She's a... formidable woman.
 My superintendent was a Betazoid -- a full telepath. When he called you into his office, he didn't have to ask what you'd done.
 On-screen.
 In my ready room.
 Admiral Brand... what can I do for you?
 Yes... ?
 ... he had second degree burns on his chest and a multiple fracture of his right arm. But he's going to be fine.
 I'm... not certain.
 Beverly...
 Beverly... (she looks up at him) He's fine.
 Apparently, Wesley's squadron was practicing on the Academy flight range near Saturn... they were in close formation when there was a collision... all five ships were destroyed. (beat) Four of the cadets managed to transport out... one did not.
 His name was Joshua Albert.
 (firmly) Beverly. Wesley is alive and well.
 Admiral Brand will be holding a full briefing after we arrive. I'll let you know as soon as we're in orbit.
 It's an unhappy way to begin commencement. If you require any assistance, Admiral, the Enterprise is at your disposal.
 How are you feeling, Wesley?
 Would you like to talk about it... ?
 I understand. But I want you to know I'm available if you should change your mind.
 At ease, Cadet.
 (shakes his hand) Mister Locarno.
 (sympathetically) I'm afraid it doesn't get any easier.
 We'll see you at the inquiry. (to Locarno) Good to meet you, Mister Locarno.
 Boothby?
 (prompting) Jean-Luc Picard... class of twenty-seven.
 How are you?
 Let me give you a hand...
 I've acquired an interest over the years.
 -- will rot...
 Something wrong, Cadet?
 You sound... surprised...
 (grins at the memory) Was all in the legs... from all the running I used to do...
 Boothby...
 I don't know that I've ever really told you... how much... I appreciate...
 Yes, there is... I just wanted to... while I was here... (beat) You know as well as I do I would never have made it to graduation if you hadn't...
 Nevertheless, you...
 At the time I thought you were a mean-spirited, vicious old man.
 I didn't speak to you for months.
 Did you know the boy from Nova Squadron who was killed?
 (sotto) It's unusual to fly on sensors alone in that type of maneuver. A pilot relies on the visual cues from the other ships to maintain formation.
 That may well be the case. However... (softer) Wesley is one of our own.
 Good. I've spoken with Admiral Brand and she has agreed to allow us access to all of the physical evidence and testimony.
 Thank you, gentlemen.
 (dry) You could use a good herbicide instead of crawling about on your hands and knees pulling weeds.
 Boothby... tell me more about Nova Squadron.
 No.
 That final game against Minsk...
 We had a lot to celebrate. Our team wasn't supposed to win. (beat) We were proud of them...
 What exactly did he say?
 Report.
 Did Wesley's flight recorder indicate there was anything... unusual about the ship or the way it was operating?
 (musing) Filling the primary coolant tanks requires an open interlock... but that can only be done in a maintenance bay. What other reasons are there to open that valve?
 Ignite the plasma... that's exactly what they were trying to do.
 Come.
 Can you tell me what maneuver this is?
 Five ships crossing within ten meters of each other and then igniting their plasma trails. One of the most difficult and spectacular demonstrations of precision flying. It hasn't been performed by an Academy team in over a century. Do you know why?
 An accident in which all five cadets lost their lives. (beat) Nicholas Locarno wanted to end his Academy career in a blaze of glory... so he convinced the four of you to learn the Kolvoord Starburst for the commencement demonstration. If it worked, you'd thrill the assembled guests... and Locarno would graduate as a living legend. Except it didn't work... and Joshua Albert paid the price.
 Am I correct?
 (hard) I asked you a question, Cadet.
 You choose not to answer... and yet you've already given an answer to the inquiry... and that answer was a lie.
 (hard) But you neglected to mention the fact that following the loop your team executed a dangerous maneuver which was the direct cause of the crash. (beat) Yes, you told the truth... but only to a point. And a lie of omission is still a lie.
 Do you remember the day you first came aboard this ship? Your mother brought you to the bridge...
 You even sat in my chair. It annoyed me at first... a presumptuous child playing on my ship. But I never forgot the way you knew every control and display before you ever set foot on the bridge. You acted like you belonged there.
 Later... when I decided to make you an acting ensign, I was convinced you would be an outstanding officer. I've never questioned that conviction... until now.
 The first duty of every Starfleet officer is to the truth... be it scientific truth, historical truth, or personal truth. It is the guiding principle upon which Starfleet is based. If you cannot find it within yourself to stand up and tell the truth about what happened... you do not deserve to wear that uniform.
 Mister Crusher... I'll make this simple for you. Either you come forward and tell Admiral Brand what really took place... or I will.
 Dismissed.
 Mister Locarno has been expelled.
 They almost did. But... Mister Locarno made an impassioned plea for the rest of you. He said he used his influence as squadron leader to convince you all to try the Kolvoord maneuver and then to cover up the truth. He asked to take full responsibility.
 You should feel bad... and you will pay for what you did. Admiral Brand has decided that, in addition to a formal reprimand, your academic credits for the past year will be cancelled and you will not advance with your class.
 It won't be easy... staying here on campus with everyone knowing what you did... I think you have some rough times ahead.
 (echoing Boothby's words) You knew what you had to do... I just made sure you listened to yourself. (beat) Good-bye, Cadet.
 atmosphere on the bridge is tense -- they're in the middle of a pursuit and racing against a clock. Red alert is already on.
 Fire.
 Time to impact.
 Mister Worf, prepare the tractor beam.
 Suggestions?
 Make it so.
 Well done. Ensign, put us back on course for the Moselina system. Warp four as soon as we've cleared the debris field.
 Married? She's getting married?
 I will not continue to have this ship used by that woman for her convenience, simply because her daughter is one of my officers.
 The other part being?
 (halts, musing; resumes walking) Permission for an on-board wedding is granted, Number One. Nothing would please me more than giving Mrs. Troi away.
 Take us out of warp, Ensign.
 The stabilizers and the replicators. Two totally unrelated systems...
 I'll be right there. (to Geordi and Data) The bridegroom.
 Please excuse my tardiness; ship's duties. Minister Campio? I'm Jean-Luc Picard, Captain of the Enterprise. Welcome aboard, sir.
 Not at all, sir.
 He is nonetheless welcome.
 Of course. The ship is yours.
 (to com) On my way. (to all) Excuse me. (to Troi; not without humor) Counselor, I'll trust you to keep everything running smoothly.
 Are they attacking anything other than nitrium alloy?
 Mister Data... you said the asteroid we destroyed was rich in nitrium...
 That asteroid was from the Pelloris Field... if the rest of that field is rich in nitrium... it would have been a natural feeding ground.
 How long to the field, Mister Data?
 (keys combadge) Picard to the bridge...
 Set a course for the Pelloris asteroid field -- warp nine.
 -- then we may not have five hours and twenty minutes. I'm aware of that. What can we do to slow them down?
 They don't like the cold, eh? Make it so.
 Advise the bridge. (turns to exit) Mister Data, with me.
 Bridge.
 Commander, do you have any suggestions on how we could encourage the parasites to leave the ship once we reach the Pelloris Field?
 They'll follow the beam... like a trail of breadcrumbs. Very well --
 Computer; stop at next level. (no response) Computer, acknowledge.
 Report, Number One.
 Picard to engineering.
 What's happening, Mister La Forge? We're slowing down.
 At that speed there won't be a ship left to reach the Pelloris Field. Do what you have to.
 Mister Worf, have security evacuate all personnel from those decks.
 We need more speed than that, Commander.
 Make it so... and shut down all life support to those decks.
 (to Data) Divert emergency life support to those decks.
 Time to the asteroid field?
 Mister Data. The rest of us may lose consciousness. If we do, it will be your job to execute the plan as discussed.
 Mister Data... ?
 Well done...
 Mister Worf... coordinate your teams with Doctor Crusher and Commander La Forge... assess damage and injury.
 Captain's log, stardate 45733.6. Temporary repairs to the ship have been completed. (beat; wry) Our attention now turns to matters of a more festive nature.
 Captain's log, stardate 45761.3. In an effort to bring an end to their centuries-long war, Krios and Valt Minor have agreed to a Ceremony of Reconciliation, to be held aboard the Enterprise at a point mid-way between their two systems.
 tall, almost frail-looking, and his people have dark skin and hair, much in the manner of those from Earth's Indian subcontinent. Picard hands him a cup of tea.
 I apologize for the delay in our arrival; we had to stop at Harod Four and pick up a group of stranded miners.
 Was Mister La Forge able to provide the special cargo handling provisions you requested?
 I trust, Ambassador, that this cargo is not in any way dangerous?
 Go ahead.
 (rises) Set a course to intercept...
 We'll be at the rendezvous on schedule, don't worry.
 On screen.
 How many on board?
 Energize!
 An old Human expression... Mister LaForge hopes we've come close to achieving what you wanted...
 Mister La Forge is entirely at your disposal, Ambassador...
 The ambassador is very busy...
 I am the captain of this ship.
 (continuing) What is it you want?
 May I suggest that you arrange to meet at another time, after the ceremony?
 (to com) Deck seven.
 Picard to Worf.
 One of the Ferengi just waylaid Ambassador Briam. Keep a short leash on them, Lieutenant.
 (continuing) I don't want them disrupting this conference.
 What is happening?
 I'm afraid I require an explanation...
 Your concern was justified, Ambassador...
 There is a provision within the Federation Constitution that protects an individual's fundamental rights... once you were brought aboard this starship...
 A "metamorph"?
 You do this of your own accord?
 Commander Riker will show you to quarters. You need not travel in a cargo bay.
 Beverly, arranged marriages have been the basis of political alliances in many cultures, including our own...
 She knows exactly what she's doing.
 Beverly, she was born this way...
 (angry now, with frustration and sarcasm) By all means, we should throw the Prime Directive to the wind... detain her against her will... destroy any chance these worlds have for peace... interefere with their society, with their customs...
 I didn't know that...
 I'll speak with her.
 Indeed.
 Are you comfortable?
 It has come to my attention that you have been told to remain here...
 Against your wishes.
 My crew's performance is not the business of the ambassador.
 I care about what happens on board my ship.
 (ready to change the subject) Yes...
 Don't.
 Do this. (off her look) What you do... with men.
 Frankly, it is difficult for me... for many of us... to easily accept that a sentient being could live only to be what someone else wants them to be...
 What about your wishes? Your needs?
 And what about when there are no others, when you are alone... ?
 (a beat) I'm sorry. Under the circumstances, I felt it would help to learn more about you.
 I will speak with the ambassador about easing your restrictions.
 Captain's log, stardate 45780.3. We have reached the designated coordinates for the conference and await the arrival of Chancellor Alrik.
 (displeased) "Forbid" it... ?
 (controlled) You cannot confine her against her will, Ambassador... not on board this ship...
 (continuing) She is requesting some freedom of movement... and I intend to give it to her...
 Not every man...
 Unfortunately, I'm quite busy with the arrangements for the conference.
 I think you should enjoy the hospitality of our ship. Mister Data will see to your every comfort... if you will excuse me...
 I am confident of my crew's self-control. But there are civilians and guests on board...
 What?
 You are a day away from an arranged mating. Why would you want me to visit you in your quarters?
 Yes...
 (reacts) Woven art? Recovered intact?
 (enthusiastic) I've read about them for years... They were so delicate, no one expected to find any preserved... How did you hear about them?
 Your empathic powers can tell that much about me?
 Nothing. Nothing lies beneath. I'm really quite dull. I fall asleep each night with an old book in my hands...
 I don't take it lightly... I'm only... (struggling) ... trying to be as dull as possible.
 It would be inappropriate.
 I'm sorry.
 Why are you doing this?
 Captain's log, supplemental. The Ferengi have been dispatched via shuttle to Starbase One-one-seven; what charges will be brought against them depends on whether or not Ambassador Briam recovers.
 I'll advise the Valtese delegation that the conference must be postponed...
 But there are several points in the negotiations that Briam has to address...
 Familiar, yes, but I cannot represent your peoples' interests...
 There are customs and rituals with which I have no experience at all...
 This is impossible.
 I am reminded of my piano lessons as a child... preparing for some dreaded recital...
 No. I regret that I gave it up. It used to please my mother...
 (continuing) I did not like to perform in front of an audience.
 No. Just not very good.
 Dammit.
 Can we come back to this later?
 You are going to have to help me with the pronuniciations in this scroll...
 Kamala...
 I find you unavailable.
 Really, what instrument?
 The entire orchestra?
 It sounds like it was a very lonely time for you...
 I also once asked you if you were doing this of your own accord...
 Go ahead.
 Chancellor Alrik, welcome aboard the Enterprise...
 He hasn't regained consciousness yet.
 I will do my best... although I have found some of the rituals quite demanding...
 The Kriosians have authorized me to make several compromises which are favorable to your position...
 Briam has supervised a reproduction of the ancient Temple of Akadar on our holodeck...
 Kamala? Yes. She is looking forward to meeting you.
 First impressions? A thoughtful man... informed...
 Yes.
 That you were looking forward to meeting him.
 It will be the first order of business. Tomorrow. At ten.
 I should prepare for the ceremony.
 I think I can muddle my way through...
 The lights stay on.
 (re: the tea) Did you learn that from Mister Data as well?
 I shall have to have a talk with him.
 Now that I know you're listening to my voice... I can't seem to think of a word to say...
 Yes.
 (softly) Kamala, have I not done everything possible to discourage this?
 I don't wish to use you as other men have.
 I really ought to go. You do have an early appointment in the morning.
 Sorry.
 What?
 (smiles) You have one?
 Do you mind if I take off the uniform for a moment?
 I just need to talk to a friend.
 (tongue in cheek) Besides... it's all your fault.
 You insisted I look into her situation...
 (sighs) The metamorph. Kamala. We have spent a lot of time together the last few days... you were right about several things, Beverly... her entire life has been orchestrated for this moment... but she intends to see it through... to help her people end this war...
 It's not that simple.
 I barely even know who she is because who she is changes the moment the next man walks in the room. (beat, softens) But suddenly, I find myself hoping... the next man doesn't walk in.
 But he will, of course. In a few hours, the ceremony will begin... she will mate with a man who cares far more about trade agreements than about her. And I think of how she will be with him... how she will change to accomodate him... and... (beat, understatement) ... I don't like it.
 I'm sorry to be bothering you with this...
 (with warm appreciation) Perhaps I just needed a shoulder...
 Soon.
 Many.
 You've not even met him.
 Kamala...
 With me?
 Not now, Data.
 Acknowledged. (a beat) You can't go through with the ceremony.
 I'm sorry. I cannot allow this to proceed.
 Kamala will be remaining aboard the Enterprise... with me...
 Chancellor, the trade agreements will be satisfactory... you yourself told me that was your priority. She is mine. Let us begin the real work here of establishing a long and just peace...
 Your preparation made the negotiations simple, Ambassador... and Kamala was able to guide me through the rituals...
 Curious?
 (evenly) Ambassador, have a safe trip home.
 Earl Grey. Hot.
 Captain's log, stardate 45852.1. The Enterprise has arrived at FGC-four-seven -- a nebula which has formed around a neutron star. We are eager to investigate this unique formation.
 NDS at stations. GEORDI is at an aft science station. Everyone watches the main viewscreen, which displays the nebula -- a rare and special sight.
 Take us in, Ensign. One-quarter impulse.
 Engineering. Report.
 Bridge to La Forge. Our speed is still dropping.
 Explanation.
 If you can't correct it... we're going to have to reverse course and leave the nebula.
 It seems we're observing a unique phenomenon... one that hasn't been recorded before.
 Agreed. Collect your sample, Mister La Forge. We'll proceed -- with caution. (beat) Dismissed.
 Is it anything the shields can't handle?
 Mister Data -- ?
 But sensors don't show anything out there, right?
 Can we go to warp speed?
 Ensign, increase power to the impulse engines.
 (to Com) Bridge to Commander Riker... check with Mister La Forge... see if he's found anything in that matter sample from the nebula.
 Proceed.
 Remarkable...
 Agreed. Ensign -- bring us about and take us out of the nebula.
 Do your best, Ensign.
 Status, Mister Data?
 Continue full sensor sweeps. I want all the information we can gather.
 Mister Data?
 Ensign, bring us to bearing oh-three-oh mark five.
 Steady as she goes...
 (taps communicator) Picard to Lieutenant Worf.
 We have established the presence of what appears to be an alien entity on board. (beat) It seems the entity has manifested itself in the form of a twelve- year-old girl who has been seen with Clara Sutter. She has blonde hair... blue eyes...
 When?
 (reacts) Engineering... Security Alert, Mister Worf. Be on the lookout.
 Thank you, Clara. If we need your help again, I hope we can count on you.
 On my way.
 Report.
 All stop.
 On screen.
 We know you've been on the ship for some time now. We know you've been posing as Clara's friend -- and that you've been threatening her... (beat) We can only assume there's a connection between you and the life-forms attacking our ship...
 You are obviously an intelligent being. There's no reason for you to hide...
 Talk to us. Or can you only communicate by frightening a small child?
 (to Isabella) Who are you?
 Energy... is that why they're draining our shields?
 (taps communicator) Picard to bridge. Report.
 Acknowledged.
 If it's energy you want, we can provide it in other ways. You needn't destroy us.
 (reacts) What makes you say that?
 (surprised) In what way did we mistreat her?
 (interrupting) You mean where you wanted her to.
 You were taking her to places that were inappropriate -- even dangerous.
 We had no way of knowing that. We had no way of knowing you were real. All we knew was that a little girl's imaginary friend was scaring her... threatening her...
 I'm beginning to understand. You've seen this ship... all of us... from a unique perspective -- a child's point of view. It must have seemed terribly unfair and restrictive...
 As adults, we don't always stop to realize how everything we say and do shapes the impressions of young people. (beat) But if you are to judge us as a people by the way we treat our children... and I cannot think of a better criterion... you must understand how deeply we care for them. When our children are young, they cannot always understand what might be dangerous. Our rules are a way to keep them from harm. Either real or imagined.
 This is part of the continuity of the Human species. You see... when Clara grows up, she will make rules for her children... to protect them... just as we protect her.
 Status, Number One?
 Notify all sections we'll be leaving the area in one hour.
 Mister La Forge, I want you to drive the warp engines to full power, and direct a flow of energy out into the nebula.
 Captain's log, stardate 45854.2. The Enterprise is charting six star systems that make up the Argolis cluster, an area being considered for colonization.
 at ops, WORF at tactical; various SUPERNUMERARIES fill the other posts as needed.
 In a moment, Mister Data.
 Where is it coming from?
 Life signs?
 Go ahead, Number One.
 Away team, prepare to return to the ship.
 Your concern is noted, Doctor. But any intervention on your part would only alert the Borg to our having been here.
 Security measures must be taken before we beam it on board.
 Mister Data, notify security to prepare a detention cell. (to com) Bridge to engineering.
 We're bringing a Borg survivor on board. We'll need to neutralize the homing signal --
 (continued) -- prevent it from sending or receiving transmissions of any kind.
 Picard to Riker.
 We're transporting you directly to the detention cell.
 The cell, Doctor. Whatever equipment you need will be brought to you there.
 Come.
 I don't think so, Counselor.
 I am quite recovered from my experience, thank you.
 Counselor --
 Counselor, I very much appreciate your concern for me. But I assure you, it is misplaced.
 I have carefully considered the implications of having this Borg on the ship. I have weighed the possible risks, and I am convinced we've done the right thing. (beat) I am quite comfortable with my decision.
 I will certainly avail myself of your help.
 The Borg will die if they're removed permanently. Their brains grow dependent on the biochips.
 Mister La Forge... do you have enought knowledge of Borg programming to alter the pathways to the root command structure?
 If we could get to the root command... we could introduce an invasive programming sequence through its biochip system... and then return it to the hive.
 Until it infected the entire Collective. We could disable their neural network in one stroke.
 Quite right, Doctor. And if all goes well, a terminal one.
 Comments.
 Which under most circumstances would be unconscionable. But as I see it, the Borg leave us little choice.
 They have declared war on our way of life. We are to be assimilated.
 Think of them as a single, collective being. Any one Borg is no more an individual than your arm or your leg.
 Your point?
 It comes down to this: We are faced with an enemy that is determined to destroy us, and with whom we have no hope of negotiating peace. Unless that changes, we are justified in doing anything we can to survive.
 Picard, here.
 Acknowledged. (stands) We will proceed as planned.
 Trying to find an access terminal, so he can interface with the collective. He doesn't understand that the signal has been cut off.
 He's alone. For the first time in his life he's being forced to cope with his environment without the resources of the Collective.
 Arrange to feed it.
 Last week when you scored two touches on me, you liked it well enough.
 Today your foil was dipping too low... you kept letting me inside.
 Yes.
 I'm not sure. I hope so.
 It was an errand of mercy... he was injured, Doctor Crusher decided for humanitarian reasons to care for him --
 Shall we go again?
 What is it, Number One?
 Analysis.
 How long do we have?
 It looks harmless enough.
 How can a geometric form disable a computer system?
 Quite original. How long before total systems failure?
 When can you begin the process?
 Very well. Proceed as soon as you're ready.
 For what reason?
 I see.
 Centuries ago, when laboratory animals were used for research... scientists would occasionally become attached to the creatures. That was a problem if the experiment involved killing them. (beat) I would suggest you unattach yourself from the Borg, Mister La Forge.
 Come.
 Guinan... please, come in.
 I'm delighted to see you. Would you like something to drink?
 A strong forearm is always an advantage in fencing...
 Surprised...
 If you've come here to persuade me not to use the invasive program...
 Two days ago, you were so upset about the Borg even being on the ship that you tore the foil out of my hand. Now you're here questioning whether he should be treated as an enemy.
 (after a beat) I haven't talked to him.
 I see no need --
 It's a Borg, damn it, not a person --!
 (fed up) Because he's been given a name by a member of the crew doesn't mean he's no longer Borg. Because he's young doesn't mean he's innocent. He is what he is and in spite of the efforts to turn him into some kind of pet -- I will not alter our plans.
 Yes, Lieutenant.
 Proceed.
 You may wait outside, Lieutenant.
 Yes. I am Locutus... of Borg.
 This is a primitive culture. I am here to facilitate its incorporation. Identify yourself.
 Identify yourself.
 This is not a Borg identification.
 This culture will be assimilated.
 Irrelevant.
 Resistance is futile.
 They will be found. It is inevitable. All will be assimilated.
 Yes.
 Then he will die.
 You will assist us in assimilating this vessel.
 You are Borg. You will assist us.
 What did you say?
 "I"... ?
 But... you are Borg.
 ... I think I deliberately avoided speaking with the Borg because I didn't want anything to get in the way of our plan. (beat) But now something has. As far as I can tell, he seems to be a fully realized individual. He has even accepted me as Picard, Captain of this ship, and not as Locutus.
 Yes. If we used him in that manner, we'd be no better than the enemy we seek to destroy. I want other options.
 I doubt it. They have nothing to gain by that. It's more likely they'll simply wipe out his memory of this experience.
 But perhaps...
 ... in the short time before they purge those memories... the sense of individuality which he has gained here will be transmitted throughout the Collective.
 Every one of the Borg will have the opportunity to experience the feeling of... singularity. (MORE)
 Perhaps that would be the most pernicious program of all... the knowledge of self, spread through the Borg Collective in that brief moment, might alter them forever.
 We will leave his memories intact.
 Hugh... a Borg rescue vessel is approaching. It will be here within three hours. We can return you to the crash site, where they will find you and take you home.
 Or... if you wish, you may remain here with us.
 Hugh, we'll deal with the repercussions later. What we must know is what you want.
 Yes. We would grant you asylum.
 (to Hugh) The Borg ship will enter orbit of the moon within an hour. You'll soon be headed home.
 We'll beam him down and take position in the star's chromosphere. Its interference will hide us from their sensors.
 My experience suggests that they would ignore him. (to Hugh) Would you agree?
 Because they needed a liaison to communicate with Humans. The Borg ignored every away team we sent to their ship, including yours, Doctor.
 (to Geordi) You may accompany him.
 Goodbye.
 Energize.
 Increase power to the shields. Hold us here.
 McDOWELL is at tactical. The ship is on YELLOW ALERT and there is a sense of urgency in the air.
 Time, Mister Data?
 (to com) Romulan ship, this is the Enterprise. We are en route to your position.
 Repeat your last transmission.
 (to com) Bridge to Commander Riker.
 Number One... transport to the Romulan vessel as soon as we're in range.
 Begin a level one diagnostic. All transporter systems to remain off-line until further notice. (to Data) Could they have materialized somewhere else?
 (to Troi) Counselor?
 Go ahead, Number One.
 Mister Data, you may continue your diagnostic of the transporter system later. Take a shuttlecraft and two more engineers to the Romulan ship.
 (to McDowell) Mister McDowell, alert the main shuttlebay to have all available ships and pilots standing by in case we need them.
 (to Conn Officer) Lay in a course to take us away from the Romulan ship at Warp One in case it explodes.
 Understood, Number One. We'll stand by for your signal.
 (to com) Understood, Commander. Keep us informed of your efforts. Picard out. (to McDowell) I'll be in sickbay.
 (gently) We've already checked those possibilities. (beat) The preliminary findings indicate there was a radiation surge from the Romulan engine core which disrupted the signal. They never rematerialized.
 (gentle, but firm) We've done all we can, Beverly.
 (to Beverly) None that I know of, but I'll check with the Bajoran Liaison Office.
 Picard to Riker.
 Good. What is the status of their engine replacement?
 Very well.
 By all means.
 Permission granted. Make whatever arrangements you find appropriate.
 (nods) That would explain why they're this far away from Romulan space... to avoid being picked up on Federation long-range scanners.
 Commander... there will be a memorial service at twenty-three hundred hours this evening. Mister Data is making the arrangements.
 (acknowledging) You knew La Forge longer than any of us.
 Coordinate with Mister Data.
 On screen.
 Understood. (to McDowell) Disconnect the power transfer beam.
 It was our pleasure, Mirok. I hope that this example of cooperation between our two people is not an isolated incident.
 (to Con Officer) Set a course for the Garadius system. (raises his hand) Warp six...
 Very well. Let me know when your sweep is finished.
 Mister McDowell, you have the bridge. I'll be... at the service in Ten Forward.
 Deck Ten.
 I've been thinking about the first time I met Geordi La Forge. He was a young officer assigned to pilot me on an inspection tour... I made some off-hand remark about the shuttle's engine efficiency not being what it should... the next morning I found he'd stayed up all night refitting the fusion initiators. (beat) I knew right then that I wanted him with me on my next command.
 Have you decided what you're going to say about Ensign Ro?
 Well. This is... unusual.
 (to Beverly) ... if she hadn't lost her rank following the incident at Garon Four, I think she would've made lieutenant commander by now.
 (to com) Go ahead.
 Stand by, Ensign.
 Excuse me, Mister Data. (Data turns)
 (over action) I'd like to get under way as soon as possible. The situation on Garadius Four is becoming serious.
 Excellent.
 (hits combadge) Mister McDowell, set course for Gardius Four and engage at---
 Very well.
 (to Data) Did you see that?
 It wasn't ghosts, Mister Data... what did we see?
 Are you saying you think they're still alive?
 (to com) That was Commander Geordi La Forge, Ensign. Please follow his instructions.
 Captain's log, stardate 45944.1. We're en route to Starbase Two-eighteen after a magnetic wave survey of the Parvenium Sector. We will give our report directly to Fleet Admiral Gustafson.
 positions; N.D.'s as necessary. There is a light-hearted mood on the bridge.
 The last time I encountered Admiral Gustafson... I ended up spending nine straight hours at the opera.
 The entire "Ring" cycle at one sitting...
 And for me... but not, apparently, for Admiral Gustafson. She went back the next day and sat through it all again. I warned her that this time --
 On screen.
 Magnify.
 Mister Data?
 Increase power to --
 Where is this... ?
 Computer, freeze program. (beat) End program.
 Picard to Enterprise --
 I asked you... what is this place?
 Where is my uniform? My communicator?
 I am Captain Jean-Luc Picard of the Federation Starship Enterprise. I would like to speak with whoever is in charge here.
 Just tell me this -- am I a prisoner here?
 Are you in charge here?
 I want to be returned to my ship immediately.
 Please... if you could tell me... what is this place? Where am I?
 That must be it. Perhaps you could help me...
 My name is Kamin... and you are -- ?
 Ah. And you say I've been ill...
 Eline.
 And... what is this place?
 Please -- I'm sure it will come back to me...
 What planet?
 I'm really quite all right. If you'll just answer...
 Kataan... not a Federation planet.
 I think I'll take a walk...
 Exercise will do me good. I'd like to -- re-acquaint myself with the surroundings.
 Hungry, thirsty... weary... I suppose that proves this isn't a dream, doesn't it?
 It's not my life... I know that much.
 I walked. For hours.
 This is delicious...
 Would you -- answer some questions for me? No matter how strange they might seem to you?
 Are there other planets in this star system? Do you visit any other systems... ?
 All right. Is there any kind of communication system here? How do you send messages to... to other communities? Other places?
 Yes. When can that be arranged?
 Of course. Anything you can tell me would be helpful. We are... married?
 What is it that I do... here in Ressik?
 The flute?
 And when did I learn to play it?
 I see what you mean.
 Thank you for the soup. And for your help. Tomorrow will you help me send a message?
 I'll sleep here...
 I've been sick... I may be tossing and turning... it wouldn't be fair to you.
 Where did you get this?
 I'm just charting the sun's movements. It might give some clues to the cause of this drought.
 The memory's five years old now, but it's still inside me. (shrugs) My other existence may be gone, but I still wonder about it.
 Eline...
 It was real... as real as this is. You can't expect me to forget the lifetime I spent there...
 I know this has been hard for you...
 You have been amazingly tolerant.
 Good morning, Batai...
 Yes... (to Eline) Will you come along?
 It isn't her fault. These last few years have been difficult for her.
 If the weather pattern doesn't change, rationing won't be enough. We will run out of water.
 No. I haven't spoken to you before.
 I suggest we build atmospheric condensers which could extract water from the air.
 Iron weaving. (beat) And playing the flute.
 Each community would be responsible for its own. These condensers could mean the difference between watering our crops... or watching them die.
 We'll never see an atmospheric condenser...
 Come to dinner tonight, my friend. I'll make a vegetable stew. We'll talk about building our own condenser.
 I'm not brooding. I'm immersed in my music.
 (re: flute) I've found it helps me think. (a smile) The real surprise is that I enjoy it so much.
 Goodnight, my friend.
 Yes, ma'am.
 I'm the one who's sorry. (beat) Everything you said this morning was absolutely right.
 I've given you so little... and you have given me so much... tenderness, patience... and a good talking to when I needed it. (beat) You've been more than I could ever have hoped for. More than I deserve.
 Not such a wonderful husband.
 I spend my spare time charting the stars... I disappear for days at a time exploring the countryside... and I never put away my shoes. I lead my life very much as I did -- before. (quick glance at her) Old habits.
 I'd like to ask your permission to build something.
 In this case, I think I do.
 A nursery.
 Unless you'd rather have a porch. It'd certainly be easier to build...
 We name this child for a dear friend who died last year... but who will now live on through his namesake.
 He's starting life in the warmth of friends. Thank you. (re: long table) Please, help yourselves to something to eat.
 I remember. I was so nervous I thought I might drop her. (beat) Now look at her... a little lady...
 (an admission) I'd always thought I didn't need children to make my life complete... now, I can't imagine life without them.
 Meribor... ?
 That's my hobby; find your own.
 And what has the scientist been up to today?
 I haven't reached any conclusion. A good scientist doesn't function by conjecture.
 (beat) Tell me... why don't you spend more time with that young fellow Dannick?
 I'm not; I'm hypothesizing that he's in love with you.
 Perhaps I should have filled your head with trivial concerns... games and toys and clothes...
 No... but it saddens me to see you bear the burden of knowing things... things you can't change.
 But I'm not sixteen. With my life ahead of me.
 I can only say... (Beat) ... Live now, Meribor. Always make "now" the most precious time. "Now" will not come again.
 Ah. Thank you, dear.
 Fine. Then maybe you'll sit down and rest the way you're supposed to.
 He loves doing a lot of things -- too many. One week he wants to be a botanist, the next week a sculptor. I wish he could find some focus in his life.
 (calling) Batai?
 I get the feeling from your mother that you have something to tell me.
 Leaving school -- ? No, you're not --
 Last year, all you cared about was mathematics. A year before that it was botany. Now --
 We'll... we'll discuss it.
 If music is what he wants... why should I stand in his way? (beat) Who knows how much time he'll have to follow any dream.
 Yes. (beat) It's possible he'll dismiss me from the Council.
 The evidence is too pronounced. I can't stay silent.
 (brandishing journal) The facts are here. At least show them to someone who will recognize what they mean.
 If you won't take them, I most certainly will.
 Surely the technology exists to save something of this world... perhaps some people could be evacuated...
 A collection of genetic samples, then -- something, anything -- you can't just let this civilization die --
 What is it -- ?
 Doctor -- ?
 (in kind) You always had a flair for the dramatic...
 He didn't have to. They already know.
 (small smile) No...
 I will.
 You shouldn't be out there for so long. It's damaging, you know that.
 Mmnph. (to Kamie) Do you wear your skin protector outdoors, young man?
 What "launching"? What's he talking about?
 Are we, indeed. I'm not going anywhere to watch anything.
 (looking after them) Breaks my heart to look at him...
 My grandson. Breaks my heart... he deserves a full rich life, and he's not going to get one.
 Why didn't I hear anything about a launching?
 Did everyone know about this except me?
 I can see all right from here.
 You go on with the others. Go hold onto my grandson, and watch the damned thing go up... for all the good it'll do. What is it they're launching?
 Seen it? What are you talking about? I haven't seen any missile.
 (in disbelief) Batai?
 A probe... that encounters someone...
 ... someone in the future... (realizing) ... it's me, isn't it? I'm the someone...
 I'm the one it finds... that's what this launching is -- a probe that finds me... in the future...
 Eline...
 Eline...
 (very weak) What...
 How long? How long have I been... like this?
 (lost) Twenty-five minutes?
 Very well, Doctor. But as soon as you're done... I have a great deal to tell you.
 Come.
 Yes, thank you... but I find I'm having to remind myself that this -- (gesturing) -- is really my home.
 Captain's log, stardate 45959.1. The Enterprise has been recalled to sector zero zero one on a priority mission.
 (continuing) All we've been told is that evidence has been discovered indicating the presence of extraterrestrials on Earth... five centuries ago.
 mining lights... a SCIENTIST, male, late forties, leads the way...
 And it's been determined that they date back to the late nineteenth century... ?
 What makes you think extraterrestrials are related to this discovery...
 Triolic waves?
 I'm curious, Doctor. There are far greater experts on Earth who could investigate your mystery. Why bring the Enterprise all the way home?
 Captain's log, stardate 45960.2. We have transported the materials discovered in the cavern back to the ship for analysis. I wish I could be as dispassionate about the implications as my second officer...
 Is it... yours, Data?
 Could it be Lore?
 (re: the head) Type R?
 Can you determine how long it has been in the cavern?
 Cellular fossil... ?
 Number One, lay in a course...
 Picard to bridge officers... we're approaching the Devidia system... report to your stations...
 Any sign of life?
 Take us into a standard orbit above those coordinates...
 Would these triolic waves be dangerous to humanoids?
 (to Riker) Take an away team.
 (interrupting) Mister Data, I'll need you on the bridge to monitor the sensor readings during this investigation...
 Yes, yes I am aware of that...
 I see no reason why we shouldn't take reasonable precautions...
 Then, I shall be irrational.
 I hope that's true, Data. Nevertheless, this investigation began with your death... I am simply trying to see that it doesn't end the same way.
 Cheat fate... ? Perhaps we can't, Mister Data. But, to be honest, I don't think I could forgive myself... if we didn't at least give it a try.
 (beat) Proceed.
 Commander Riker, report!
 Captain's log, supplemental. Close-range sensor analysis has yielded no further trace of Commander Data. Despite the emotional repercussions among my crew, I must move this mission forward.
 Mister Data cannot be our priority...
 (nods) We have to operate on the assumption that there is a threat... if not to us then to 19th-century Earth. Our first order of business is to determine what that threat may be. (turns to Geordi) In order to do that, Mister La Forge, we must find a way to communicate with these life-forms...
 Can you build one?
 I don't want anyone else going in alone.
 Make it so.
 Perhaps in the course of our investigation we will. I hope so.
 (lightly) I'm afraid to interrupt.
 (re: glassware) And let me miss all this? I haven't seen such a complex operation since the Academy lab final in exochemistry.
 What did you want to see me about?
 Yes.
 This is rather unusual... for you to be curious about an away mission...
 Guinan, if you have something to tell me, I'm listening.
 (agrees) That's general policy...
 Why?
 Of course.
 What do you mean?
 How soon will you be ready?
 I have reason to believe my presence on this mission is imperative.
 Yes. (beat) Mister Worf, you will report to the bridge.
 The security of the Enterprise is of paramount importance, Lieutenant.
 Proceed, Mister La Forge.
 Why can we see them when they can't see us?
 A life-form... ?
 If they're moving among humans, they must have taken human form. The question is, how do we know who we're looking for... ?
 (resigned) Coming, Mrs. Carmichael...
 Yes... ?
 Ah. The... rent.
 Mrs. Carmichael, my troupe is even now in rehearsals for a new production.
 It's -- "A Midsummer Night's Dream."
 We've performed in London... Paris... Milan... all to sold out houses. I assure you, we'll be able to pay the rent... with a bonus.
 Hello, Officer. This the Infirmary?
 Replacing the wick screws. City ordinance... makes it safer in case of an earthquake.
 That's it for this ward. Have to be moving on.
 (climbing in) Agreed. Let's get out of here.
 Ah -- just in time! We need someone to read a part...
 Now, Mrs. Carmichael... (points insistently) Right there...
 Well, I don't need to hear any more. That was -- truly unique.
 I think we've found our Titania... (to the others) ... don't you agree?
 You see? We'll begin rehearsals tomorrow.
 Very well.
 Not yet. But you will.
 If we can get back there... and destroy that site... can we put an end to their time traveling... ?
 We have no choice but to try.
 (to the others) Follow him!
 Don't try to sit up too quickly... you've lost a lot of blood.
 I hope they're safely back on the Enterprise by now.
 You were hurt. I had to make sure you were all right.
 I can't very well let anything happen to you... you're far too important to me.
 Believe me, in the future the tables will be turned.
 It goes beyond friendship.
 No. Because for me, it won't have happened yet.
 History fulfilling itself...
 Can you communicate?
 Are you injured?
 You hunt us... you kill us. We cannot allow that.
 Perhaps we could find a substitute...
 We cannot allow that. (beat) We know how you move back and forth through time... my crew has returned to the twenty-fourth century to destroy your transport site on Devidia Two --
 Guinan...
 I'm going to get help. We have to get you out of here...
 No. You need help.
 You'll have to get help. Guinan needs medical attention...
 (beat) We have a bill at Mrs. Carmichael's boarding house --
 Thank you. (beat) I wish time had allowed me to know you better...
 I'll see you... in a few minutes.
 He does indeed, Commander. And believe me... it's good to be back.
 Captain's Log, Stardate 46001.3.
 Everyone who should be in the nineteenth century is safely there, and those who should be in the twenty-fourth are here. Mister Data has been restored to us, head and all... and Samuel Clemens will write the books he was to have written after our encounter.
 Captain's Log, Stardate 46041.1. We have located the U.S.S. Yosemite, a Starfleet science vessel sent to the Igo Sector to observe a remote plamsa streamer. The ship has not been heard from in several days.
 stations. There is a sense of urgency in the air.
 Magnify.
 Hail them.
 Life signs?
 Can we tractor the vessel out?
 Too risky -- you could be pulled in, too. (to Com) Bridge to Engineering -- Geordi, can we beam an Away Team onto the science ship?
 Acknowledged. Meet Commander Riker in Transporter Room Three.
 Is there any evidence to support this?
 I have an Away Team aboard the ship now. Their initial report indicates an explosion on board. But we're not sure if it was from an attack...
 A few hours. If it does look like the Cardassians, I'll contact you immediately.
 Yes, Mister Data?
 Acknowledged. Have Commander Riker join me in my Ready Room as soon as he's on board.
 Captain's Log, supplemental. Our investigation has revealed there was an explosion aboard the Yosemite -- possibly the result of an attack. We are still analyzing data obtained by the Away Team.
 Is there any evidence of a hull breach... could plasma from the streamer have found its way into the ship?
 (onto the idea) And if the plasma exploded... that would explain a few things. (beat) Let me know when the analysis is complete.
 (to Riker) Number One?
 Mister Barclay, I understand you've been under a considerable amount of strain the past couple of days. Isn't it possible you simply imagined --
 (to Geordi) Commander La Forge, get Chief O'Brien -- take the Transporter system apart piece by piece if you have to. (to Worf) Mister Worf -- maintain a level three security alert until further notice.
 (satisfied, to all) Keep me apprised. Dismissed.
 Captain's Log, Stardate 46043.6. The reprogrammed bio-filter was effective in removing the alien microbes from Mister Barclay and the four crewmembers. The microbes have been returned to the plasma streamer.
 Captain's Log, Stardate 46071.6. We have been called to the aid of a transport ship, which has been attacked near Rekag-Seronia. Hostilities between the two factions on that planet have intensified recently, threatening an important Federation shipping route.
 needed.
 Is the transport still under attack?
 On screen.
 Open a channel, Mister Worf.
 This is Captain Jean-Luc Picard of the Federation starship Enterprise.
 Do you have injuries? Can we assist you in any way?
 Of course...
 Captain, I'm losing you. Go ahead and beam your passengers on board...
 Counselor, will you see to our guests' needs and then escort them to my Ready Room.
 With all due respect, Admiral -- to put the Ambassador on another unarmed transport will only invite a second assault.
 Picard to Riker.
 Set a course for Seronia.
 I wanted to express my condolences. This must be a difficult time for you.
 Do you want to consider postponing your visit to Bironi? I'm sure everyone would understand...
 I was only thinking of your best interests...
 Go ahead, Mister Worf.
 Yellow alert, Mister Worf.
 I must take the necessary precautions. One ship you were on has already been attacked. (beat) And I think you'd agree that a dead man cannot be a particularly effective negotiator.
 You wanted to see me, Doctor?
 She was elderly... and Alkar said she had been ill...
 What are you suggesting -- ?
 Do you have any reason to suspect her death poses some kind of threat to the Enterprise?
 Then I can't see any alternative but to comply with his wishes.
 We're in the middle of a delicate situation. I'd prefer not to go to him with this unless you feel it's absolutely necessary.
 Captain's Log, Stardate 46073.6. We have arrived without incident at Seronia, where two members of Ambassador Alkar's delegation have been waiting. They have joined us to report on the situation in the capital city.
 I was under the impression there was a cease fire agreement.
 Ambassador... the situation sounds volatile. Perhaps a cooling off period --
 Then I recommend asking both sides if they will agree to meet at the coastal city of Darthen.
 It has been neutral throughout the conflict. Both Seronians and Rekag loyalists live there. It might be acceptable as a compromise.
 (beat) Very well.
 Ambassador, we've just gotten word that the Rekags and Seronians are in disagreement about the seating arrangement at the conference table.
 The good news, however, is that the cease fire seems to be holding.
 Chief --
 Deanna... ?
 Security to Transporter Room Two.
 What's happened to Deanna... ?
 No... I think you must proceed with your mission.
 (to Transporter Chief) Chief, transport them to the surface.
 A little stiff, but otherwise fine.
 Could Deanna have picked up some kind of disease from her?
 Picard to Lieutenant Worf...
 Mister Worf, contact the Alliance conference on Seronia. I need to speak with Ambassador Alkar.
 (to Worf) Let me know the moment he is available.
 Proceed with the Autopsy. (then; softer) Let me know as soon as you have something.
 How could that be? We both saw the woman.
 Picard to Lieutenant Worf...
 Meet me in Transporter Room Two. We're going to the surface.
 And she wasn't ninety-three years old.
 Yes, and for very good reason. Deanna Troi is in Sickbay dying. Doctor Crusher doesn't know the cause of her condition. (beat) But I believe you do.
 I'm not particularly interested in your techniques as a mediator --
 Is this... what you've done to Counselor Troi?
 Then... you deliberately began using Deanna...
 Receptacles... ?
 No, Alkar... you can't explain away a wantonly immoral act just because you think it's connected to some higher purpose.
 And you think that justifies brutalizing her? And the others you've used?
 If you think you appear courageous, you're mistaken. You're a coward. You exploit the innocent so you don't have to shoulder the burden of unpleasant emotions.
 This time you will be held accountable. I'm taking you back to the Enterprise to release Counselor Troi.
 Lock on to Alkar's signal and bring him aboard.
 Then work with Mister La Forge to find a way to break through it. (beat) I want that man on this ship.
 I'll be in Sickbay.
 He has no intention of stopping. He feels perfectly justified in using her until she dies.
 If he thinks Deanna is dead... he'll break the link and turn to someone else -- probably one of his delegation.
 We must also keep in mind that we're putting his next victim at risk... I'll want every possible security measure taken to protect that person.
 Proceed, Doctor.
 Enterprise to Ambassador Alkar. Respond, sir.
 You must return to the Enterprise immediately. Counselor Troi is dying. (beat) We are prepared to transport you from the surface whether you come willingly or not.
 They won't protect you any longer. Transporter Room Two, prepare to energize --
 I intend to make certain that you answer for what you have done.
 Picard to Transporter Room Two... lock on to the young woman in Ambassador Alkar's quarters... stand by to transport her out of there.
 Mister Worf, station yourself outside the quarters.
 Picard to Transporter Room Three...
 (touches communicator) Picard to Transporter Room Three. Energize.
 (to Rager) Bring us out of warp, Ensign. All stop.
 Report.
 (to Worf) Can you localize the source of the gravity field?
 Why didn't we detect it before now?
 Mister Data, could this be a... Dyson Sphere?
 It's a very old theory, Number One. I'm not surprised you haven't heard of it. A twentieth century physicist, Freeman Dyson, postulated that an enormous hollow sphere could be constructed around a star. This would have the advantage of harnessing all the radiant energy of the star. A population living on the interior surface would therefore have a virtually inexhaustible source of power.
 Ensign Rager, take us into synchronous orbit above that position.
 I'm Captain Jean-Luc Picard. Welcome aboard the Enterprise, Captain Scott.
 How are you feeling?
 I must say I was more than a little surprised when Commander Riker informed me you were aboard the Jenolan. Our records didn't list you as one of their crew.
 I see. Well, I would very much enjoy the opportunity to discuss your career at some point. History is one of my hobbies and I'm sure you have some fascinating insights into the events of your time.
 Good. I look forward to it. (to Geordi) Commander, we need to begin a full spectrographic analysis of the Dyson Sphere.
 (to Scott) Again, welcome aboard, Captain.
 Is there any indication that the sphere is inhabited?
 Send out a series of class four probes to survey the far side of the sphere. Perhaps we'll have more luck with them.
 I hope I'm not interrupting, but I was just coming off duty and wanted to see how you were doing.
 Aldeberan whiskey. (off Scott's look of surprise) Who do you think gave it to Guinan?
 Constitution class...
 There's one at the fleet museum. This is your Enterprise?
 The first ship I ever served aboard as Captain was called the Stargazer... it was an overworked, underpowered vessel that was always on the verge of flying apart at the seams. In every measurable way, my Enterprise is a superior ship. (beat) And yet... there are times I miss that cramped little Bridge very much.
 What do you think of the Enterprise-D?
 But... ?
 Seventy-five years is a long time. If you'd like to study some of the technical --
 Come.
 Mister La Forge, I understand that the Jenolen conducted an extensive survey of the Dyson sphere before it crashed. Have we been able to access those records?
 Perhaps Captain Scott could be of use in accessing that material.
 Commander. I'd like you to accompany Mister Scott.
 This is not an order, Geordi, it is a request... one which you are free to decline. (beat) One of the most important things in a man's life is the need to feel useful. Mister Scott is a Starfleet officer... I would like him to feel useful again.
 Thank you.
 You said you found a communications array?
 Mister Worf, open a channel to that array.
 Full sensor sweep, Mister Data. Where are we?
 Maneuvering thrusters?
 No. But it may be enough to turn us into orbit and hold our distance from the photosphere.
 (to Riker) Port thrusters ahead full, starboard back full.
 Very well.
 Mister Data, begin a scan of the interior surface for life forms. I want to know who brought us in here and why.
 That would explain why they abandoned it. (beat) But if there's no one still living here, how were we brought inside?
 (to Worf) Shields?
 Go ahead Number One.
 Good. Stand-by. (to Worf) Can we use the phasers to open a hole in the sphere?
 Mister Data, we need to find a way out of here. Begin scanning for another hatch or portal that might still be open.
 (to com) We read you, go ahead Commander.
 Understood. (urgent, to Rager) Set a course.
 (to Data) How long will it take us to reach them?
 (to com) Bridge to Transporter Room Three. Stand by to beam two from the Jenolen as soon as we're in range.
 (quickly) Bridge to Transporter Room. Energize. (a quick beat, then to Worf) Fire torpedoes.
 Call it... an extended loan. Since you lost your ship while saving ours, it seemed only fair.
 (holds out hand) Bon voyage, Mister Scott.
 Captain's Log, Stardate 46154.2. The Enterprise has entered the Amargosa Diaspora, an unusually dense globular cluster. We are faced with the daunting task of charting this vast region.
 What's causing it?
 (surprised) I thought tetryons were unstable in normal space...
 (re: wall) Does this pose a danger to the ship?
 Keep that option ready. For now, proceed with the analysis.
 Tetryons... the same particles in the Cargo Bay...
 Explanation?
 (to computer) Computer -- are there any crewmembers missing from the Enterprise?
 Identify them.
 When did they leave?
 (taps communicator) Picard to Bridge.
 (to com) Raise shields and maintain a Level Four security alert -- I want to know if anyone goes on or off this ship.
 (to Data, Geordi) Mister La Forge, Mister Data -- I believe if we find the source of those tetryon emissions, we may also find our missing crewmembers.
 Initiate a metallurgical analysis of the ship's hull -- subspace field incursions might have left a trace.
 Can we still beam the affected sections into space?
 (to Geordi) Has your analysis suggested any way to seal the rupture?
 (to Geordi) If someone homed in on subspace signals created by our modified sensor array... can we do the same thing to them -- track the tetryon emissions to their universe?
 (to Riker) We'll wait as long as we can for you to be returned, Number One. But as soon the spatial rupture threatens the ship... we'll have to transmit that graviton pulse.
 (to Riker) Perhaps we can give you an advantage... a way of keeping you conscious after they take you...
 (to Beverly) Doctor -- can you develop a counter-agent to the neuro-sedative they've been giving the crew?
 (to Beverly) Make it so. (to Geordi) Mister La Forge -- begin work on a homing device.
 (to Geordi) Report.
 (taps communicator) Picard to Data. Your status?
 Can you divert more power to the containment field?
 Make it so.
 Stand by to initiate the graviton pulse.
 (to com) Picard to Data. How much time?
 We can't afford to wait any longer... (beat) Begin the graviton pulse.
 Can you strengthen the graviton pulse?
 Captain's Log, Stardate 46119.2. The tetryon emissions in Cargo Bay Four have ceased, and there have been no further indications of alien intrusions. All Enterprise crewmembers are safe and accounted for. But we are still left with some unanswered questions...
 What can we do to prevent this from happening again?
 (to Data, Geordi) Have you any idea what came through the rupture, before you were able to shut it down?
 Captain's Log, Stardate 46192.3. We have arrived at Starbase one-one-two and are loading relief supplies destined for Tagra Four, an ecologically devastated planet in the Argolis Cluster. We have also taken on a rather unusual passenger.
 Welcome to the Enterprise. We're delighted to have you aboard.
 Congratulations. I understand you were selected from among hundreds of applicants for this internship.
 (smiles) Or at least what fields you're not interested in.
 Come.
 Commander, would you escort Ms. Rogers to her quarters? I have to discuss the Tagran's medical needs with Doctor Crusher.
 You've won yourself a rare opportunity. Avail yourself of it.
 Picard, here.
 (to Geordi) Commander, have you been able to determine the cause of the warp breach?
 (dismayed) Q...
 Are you responsible for the incident in Engineering?
 That being?
 Somehow I find it hard to believe that you'd come here to do us a favor...
 What is it you really want, Q? Why bring Amanda here... to the Enterprise?
 Trust you -- !
 I don't trust you and I certainly wouldn't expect Amanda to.
 She may not want that future. The decision is hers.
 If Amanda is a Q... she'll need to understand what that means. (firm) I'll introduce you, but we cannot continue to fight like this in front of Amanda. For her sake, we'll have to appear to be...
 Civil.
 We need time to explain this to her.
 Mister Data... I want you to access any available records on Amanda Rogers.
 I want to know more about her biological parents... about their death. I find it odd that any Q could die in an accident.
 I'm convinced Q isn't telling us everything. See what you can find out.
 Amanda, this is Q. (beat) He is... (searching) ... an acquaintance of ours. We've known him for years.
 I think what Q means to ask is... have you deliberately used your abilities... ?
 (warning) Q --
 (stepping forward) She doesn't want to --
 You agreed she has the right to decide her own future... yet the first chance you get you try to abduct her.
 What's going on, Q? What's your real purpose in being here?
 If you intend to protect that investment, I suggest you approach her differently.
 If I'm not mistaken, she just did.
 Number One... Doctor Crusher has some live vaccine bacilli for delivery to Tagra... they'll need to be shipped in a stasis field. Will you make the arrangements?
 On screen.
 Perhaps my Chief Engineer could assist you... ?
 Send us your design specifications -- I'm sure we can do something.
 What is it, Mister Data?
 A tornado? Why wasn't it dissipated by the Weather Modification Net?
 (a beat as he ponders) See if you can find out any details. I'd like to know more about that storm.
 Yes, Mister Data?
 What is it?
 Download the files to my Ready Room. I'll study them in there.
 Yes. I want to ask you about Amanda's biological parents. When they decided to remain on Earth, what was the reaction in the Continuum?
 Were they pressured to come back? Were they threatened with punishment if they didn't?
 The circumstance of their death was a bit odd... a tornado that escaped the Weather Modification Net... and then touched down in only one spot -- Amanda's home.
 Tornadoes develop from existing storm fronts... and there were no storm fronts in Kansas that day. Witnesses reported that the funnel materialized spontaneously... directly over Amanda's home... destroyed it... and then disappeared.
 Were Amanda's parents executed... by the Q Continuum?
 Then I think Amanda has the right to know that before she makes a choice about her future.
 Are you that despicable, Q?
 And... what have you concluded? Does she live... or does she die?
 Captain's log, Stardate 46193.8. We have arrived at Tagra Four and have begun delivering supplies. In the meantime, I am faced with a crisis of a different nature.
 I have no reason to believe Q is lying. He has orders from the Continuum... if Amanda doesn't prove herself to be fully Q... he must kill her.
 I'm inclined to agree that Amanda deserves to know the truth of the situation. We don't have the right to withhold such crucial information. (beat) But it won't be easy telling her...
 They're not convinced you're fully Q.
 They were responsible for the death of your parents...
 Amanda's question deserves an answer, Q. You've made yourself judge, jury, and -- if necessary -- executioner. By what right do you appoint yourself to this position?
 I recall how you used your superior morality when we first encountered you. You put us on trial for the crimes of humanity.
 Your arrogant pretense to being the moral guardians of the universe strikes me as a bit pale today. You have shown no evidence that you are guided by a superior moral code -- by any code whatsoever. You may be nearly omnipotent -- I won't deny your parlor tricks are impressive -- but morality? No, I don't see it. I don't acknowledge it. I would put human morality against the Q's any day.
 Perhaps that's the fascination we humans hold for you... ? That by our puny example we give you a glimmer of the one thing that eludes your omnipotence -- a moral center.
 If so, I can think of no crueler irony than for you to destroy a young woman whose only crime... is being too human.
 On my way.
 Can you correct the problem?
 Is this your doing, Q -- ?
 Mister Worf, see if there's anything we can do to cut through the interference and beam them out of there.
 On screen.
 Amanda... ?
 Captain's Log, Stardate 46235.7 Ensign Ro, Keiko O'Brien, Guinan and I are returning to the Enterprise after a fascinating visit to the planet Marlonia.
 shuttle, relaxing. The atmosphere is very informal. Picard is still energized by his recent trip and is showing Guinan some odd pieces of pottery from a small box.
 ... and I found these pieces in the tertiary level of the dig. They're typical of second century Marlonian cookware.
 Now, see these markings... they're very similar to some early Taguan designs... but the patterns are more intricate... closer to Buranian than Taguan.
 It was a very rewarding experience. (holds up shards) Look at these fragments... they're in nearly perfect condition... and they're over seven hundred years old.
 Any indication of the problem?
 Lay in a course and prepare to engage at Warp eight once we're aboard.
 Hard about, full impulse.
 Transfer auxiliary power to the inertial dampers...
 I feel fine. Everything just seems... smaller.
 Captain's Log, Stardate 46271.5. The Enterprise has entered orbit of Deinonychus Seven. But our scheduled rendezvous with the supply ship Biko has been delayed for another forty-eight hours.
 on his FLUTE (as seen in "The Inner Light"). Over the com system, two other instruments can be heard -- a CLARINET and a CELLO. Picard is playing along with the music form a pleasant harmony.
 (continuing) In the meantime, many members of the crew are taking advantage of the delay to pursue their own projects... myself included.
 (to computer) Computer -- stop playback.
 (continuing) Change the clarinet to an oboe. Continue recording.
 (to computer) Pause program.
 Come.
 It sounds like an intriguing experiment. I'll be very interested to see the results. (beat) Permission granted.
 Yes. I get the idea, Mister La Forge. Thank you. Please proceed.
 (to computer) Computer -- record again from the first measure.
 Computer -- pause program.
 Come.
 Ah... yes... a very intriguing drama. But I really don't have the time it would take to learn a part. And anyway, I'm not much of an actor...
 Oh.
 Really.
 Let me read the play again... and I'll let you know.
 Computer -- continue recording.
 Enter.
 Proceed.
 Very impressive, Mister Worf. But we'll be taking on new personnel at Starbase One-Eighteen in a few weeks. Surely the drills can wait until then.
 Mister Worf... is there some reason you're trying to give yourself more work?
 (cutting in) ... Enjoy yourself. You have some free time. Use it.
 (to computer) Computer, once more from the top.
 Computer -- activate Picard Mozart trio, Program One. (beat) Play back tracks one, two and three. Tempo allegro.
 (over the din) Computer -- stop playback!
 (to computer) Computer -- identify musical composition.
 Cat food?
 When can you have the problem corrected?
 What did you say?
 Mister La Forge -- perhaps you should take Mister Data to Engineering. See if you can find the problem.
 Captain's Log, Stardate 46278.3. Both Commander Data and the ship's computer have been restored to normal operation. Our rendezvous with the supply ship Biko has proceeded as planned.
 This is the Captain. We have arrived at the Tyran system. All senior staff to the Bridge.
 Captain's Log, stardate 46307.2. We have just come into orbit of Tyrus-Seven-A to monitor progress on the Tyran particle fountain, a radically new mining technology.
 So far the project has been fraught with problems, and is well behind schedule. Mister La Forge has been assigned to evaluate the situation.
 The Enterprise is scheduled to leave the Tyran System tomorrow. If I'm to change that plan, I'll need a good reason.
 Agreed.
 I understand one of these devices successfully repaired the faulty power grid...
 Mister La Forge, what are your thoughts?
 Mister Data?
 I'm inclined to agree. I don't think forty-eight hours is too much time to risk -- particularly when the gains might be substantial. (beat) You may proceed, Doctor.
 Doctor, I appreciate the time constraints you're under. But recognizing new life -- whatever its form -- is the principal mission of this vessel. (beat) Mister Data, what makes you think the exocomps could be alive?
 If the possibility exists... no matter how slight... that the exocomps are lifeforms, then we must examine that possibility.
 Clearly these are difficult issues to resolve. We must proceed carefully. The first task is to test Mister Data's hypothesis.
 I assume that is only a simulation...
 Very well. Proceed.
 You may rest assured that I consider this time well spent.
 For the sake of the project, I hope you're right.
 Understood. Doctor, we are evacuating this station.
 That is an order, Doctor. Assemble all personnel on the Transporter pad, now!
 Picard to Enterprise...
 (heavy static) ... ard to Ent...
 (heavily static) Ent... pare for trans...
 Is this everybody?
 Mister La Forge!
 Stand by to transport.
 Mister La Forge... Mister La Forge!
 Geordi, are you all right?
 All right...
 Link established.
 I'm reading power fluctuations... the field's not stable...
 How long can we expect this force field to last?
 We have to keep it up long enough to give Commander Riker the time he needs to get to us...
 Mister La Forge...
 That's exactly what they are... the exocomps are siphoning off power from the core...
 Can we help them? Is there any way we can moderate the power transfer?
 Drop the force field.
 I'll look forward to it.
 Something more, Mister Data?
 I think I understand the predicament you were in. It cannot have been an easy choice.
 Captain's Log: Stardate 46357.4 We have rendezvoused with the starship Cairo near the Cardassian border for an urgent meeting with Vice-Admiral Nechayev.
 replicator. The door CHIMES.
 Come.
 Welcome aboard, Admiral.
 (warm, to Nechayev) May I offer you some tea or --
 (o.c.) Freeze program.
 You were at least five seconds slower this time.
 It'll be a lot more difficult where we're going.
 I'm sorry, but I can't tell you that yet.
 Mister Worf... I have my orders. I'm sure you understand.
 (re: device) Now... this deflector isn't set properly. You have to position the emitter array so that it blocks the entire passageway or it's useless.
 I know this is difficult. But for now, all I can do is ask you to trust me.
 Mister Worf, time Doctor Crusher and me through the first tunnel. (with a smile) We'll pick up those five seconds this time.
 (to group) To Captain Jean-Luc Picard, Commanding Officer, USS Enterprise. Stardate 46358. You are hereby requested and required to relinquish command of your vessel to Captain Edward Jellico, Commanding Officer, USS Cairo as of this date. Signed, Vice-Admiral Alynna Nechayev, Starfleet Command.
 (to com) Computer, transfer all command codes to Captain Edward Jellico. Voice authorization: Picard-delta-five.
 I stand relieved.
 Most of the secondary systems were replaced during our last overhaul. (MORE)
 I don't think they'll give you any problems. But you might want to check on the port lateral --
 (quiet) It's going well. But I would prefer more current intelligence on the exact lay-out of the installation. The most recent information is over two years old.
 (wry) She didn't give me a choice.
 That would be extremely helpful.
 And one of the finest officers I've ever served with.
 Come.
 Oh, yes. (smiles) The last time I had to train like this was for the Academy marathon, but I'm managing.
 What can I do for you?
 My orders are to maintain radio silence until we've completed the mission.
 Captain... I just want you to know that Commander Riker is--
 It's not simply my opinion. He's been decorated five times by Starfleet Command and offered his own ship on more than one occasion. I think if you give him a chance, you'll find he's an outstanding officer.
 Thank you.
 (to com) Thank you, Enterprise.
 Now that we're on our way... I can finally tell you about our mission.
 Starfleet Intelligence believes the Cardassians are developing... metagenic weapons.
 Within a month, the metagenic agent itself breaks down and dissipates completely... leaving every city, road, and piece of equipment perfectly intact.
 Starfleet Intelligence believes that the Cardassians are developing a new delivery system -- one which would protect them from any accidental exposure to the toxin. (beat) They believe the Cardassians are testing a way of launching dormant metagenic material on a subspace carrier wave.
 (nods) And because the subspace wave would appear to be simple background radiation... no one would realize what was happening until it was too late.
 For several weeks, bursts of thetaband subspace emissions have been detected coming from Celtris Three. Those emissions may indicate a metagenic delivery system in operation.
 Very little. It was thought to be uninhabited until these emissions were detected. Starfleet believes there is a secret research lab located somewhere beneath the surface. (beat) Our orders are to penetrate the Celtris Three installation and determine whether or not the Cardassians are actually building a metagenic weapon.
 Then we destroy it. At all costs.
 When I was on the Stargazer, we conducted extensive tests using theta-band carrier waves. One of the reasons I was selected for this mission is my familiarity with the methods used to generate them. Mister Worf, you're along for obvious reasons. Doctor, your job will be to locate and destroy any bio-toxins we find.
 I know where we can arrange some... discreet transportation. (beat) Set course for Torman Five.
 We're not accusing you of anything.
 We're looking for Daimon Solok.
 I have a... business proposition to discuss.
 Good. Please tell... Daimon Solok that we're interested in arranging some transportation... to Celtris Three.
 Yes. I understand that Solok runs... "cargo" there from time to time.
 Well, if Solok were going to Celtris for what I'm sure are... legitimate reasons... we would be interested in quietly booking passage for the journey.
 (to Worf) Be certain your tricorder makes a precise map of our route. It will be easy to get lost in here.
 That's characteristic of thetaband emissions. You need to compress the detection band-width to get a directional fix.
 The emission source is five hundred meters east of here... and about seven hundred meters below.
 It's all right. (re: ceiling) They're called lynars... a kind of Celtran bat. They're harmless.
 There doesn't appear to be any other way down.
 This is sheer granite. We'll have to use fusing pitons.
 Unfortunately, that could take several hours.
 (over above action) Now, remember to control your descent... and don't tangle the lines.
 Ready?
 The installation should be about... three hundred meters... (points down one of the tunnels) This way.
 We need to get through here. This lava tube runs southwest for seventy meters before running into another chamber. (looks inside) The tube opens up a little more beyond this entrance. If we can widen the opening, we should be able to crawl through.
 Make it so.
 Very good, Mister Worf.
 (to others) Just a few more meters...
 (urgent) Beverly, get out of there!
 Beverly!
 Are you all right?
 We're nearly there. Do you feel like you can continue?
 (off tricorder, sotto) This looks like a maintenance hatch to the installation. (beat) I'm picking up three proximity sensors around it.
 We have no choice. (beat, then quiet, to Beverly) Remember: aim low and fire in short, controlled bursts.
 (to Worf) Now.
 (quick realization) It's a trap. Come on.
 What do you want?
 All right... so you concocted an elaborate ruse to bring me here. Why?
 La Barre, France...
 Yvette Gessard...
 Special operations on Celtris Three.
 To seek and destroy a metagenic weapon.
 Two.
 Chief Medical Officer Beverly Crusher. Lieutenant Worf.
 I don't know.
 Picard, Jean-Luc.
 La Barre, France...
 I demand to see a neutral representative... as required by the Federation-Cardassian peace treaty.
 I can't imagine what information I have that would be meaningful to you.
 I know that the burial vaults of the First Hebitian civilization are said to be magnificent.
 What happened to them?
 That war cost you hundreds of thousands of lives... depleted your food supplies... left your population weakened and miserable... and yet you risk war again.
 And yet there seems to be enough to maintain a well-outfitted -- and well fed -- military...
 The Federation would be happy to help you feed your people -- without the need for warfare.
 Not charity... a cooperative effort --
 (carefully) What I would like... is to be returned to my ship.
 (after a beat) And the price for that opportunity?
 You've injected me with drugs. You must know that I have already answered truthfully every question put to me.
 Then it seems you have more knowledge about the situation than I do.
 Torture is expressly forbidden by the terms of the Seldonis Four convention governing treatment of prisoners of war.
 I have told you what I know.
 (guarded) I see four lights.
 There are four lights.
 I... know... nothing... about Minos Korva.
 There are four lights.
 Special operations on Celtris Three.
 Your daughter... is lovely...
 I'm surprised... that you'd let her come in here...
 To let a child be exposed to this... to someone who is injured and suffering... to see that you inflict that suffering...
 Be careful, Madred. When children learn to devalue others... they can devalue anyone. Even their parents.
 Now, perhaps. What will happen when she's fifteen? Twenty? Are you prepared for the time when she might look at you and see you for what you are -- and despise you for it?
 I know that once you were a peaceful people, that you had a rich spiritual life --
 Since the military took over hundreds of thousands more have died --
 Her belly may be full... but her spirit will be empty.
 Be careful... you're showing weakness...
 What lights?
 ... le pont d'Avignon... on y danse... on y danse... sur le pont d'Avignon...
 On y danse surtout...
 (still drifting up) At home... Sunday dinner... we would sing, afterward...
 There is a refuge in the mind... a place where even you can't intrude...
 What female are you referring to?
 What have you done with her?
 What about Lieutenant Worf?
 Doctor Crusher has no information about any of Starfleet's plans. She is a medical officer.
 I see...
 No... I'm sure you didn't. (beat) How rewarding it must be now to repay others for all those years of misery.
 Torture has never been a reliable means of extracting information... it is ultimately self-defeating as a means of control... and so one wonders why it is still practiced. (beat) The only possible reason must be... pleasure.
 Madred, when I look at you now, I won't see a powerful Cardassian officer... but a small boy weeping because he was powerless to protect himself.
 (pressing) In spite of what you have done to me... I find you a pitiable man --
 You called me "Picard"...
 There are four lights.
 (with difficulty) You are four years old... weak and helpless... you cannot harm me...
 (singing in some desperation) Sur le pont... d'Avignon... on y danse... on y danse...
 ...still... felt good...
 ...don't... believe you...
 I... want to see... neutral representative...
 What... must I... do... ?
 There are four lights.
 Thank you.
 I relieve you, sir.
 You have the Bridge, Number One.
 I don't know where to begin, Counselor. It was... quite an experience.
 One thing I didn't put in my report... at the very end, he offered me a choice... between a life of comfort... or more torture... all I had to do was say there were five lights.
 No... but I was going to. I was ready to tell him anything he wanted... anything at all. But more than that, I was beginning to believe there were five lights.
 Captain's Log, Stardate 46424.1. The Enterprise has arrived at the Detrian system to observe a unique celestial event -- the collision of two planets.
 Professor... it's good to see you again.
 I want to assure you that we've not forgotten you. We spent some time investigating how you became self-aware. Frankly, it is still a mystery.
 We wrestled with that problem for some time... unfortunately without success. We turned our findings over to Starfleet's most experienced theoretical scientists.
 They have not arrived at a solution, either.
 I am concerned by the fact that you claim to have experienced the passage of time while you were stored in computer memory... I assure you we had no idea that might be the case.
 I understand your frustration --
 That's impossible. You cannot exist outside this room.
 Computer, exit.
 Even though an object appears solid here on the Holodeck...
 It has no substance in the outside world.
 No, Professor. You are a computer simulation.
 You must believe me, Professor. If you step outside that door, you will cease to exist.
 How is this possible?
 Professor, if you'll come with me... I'd like our Doctor to examine you.
 Doctor... the Holodeck is capable of creating anatomically correct organisms, down to the cellular level...
 Is there any difference between the biological readings of those simulations -- and Professor Moriarty?
 Well, Professor... my crew will continue to investigate, but for the moment you seem to have accomplished a miracle. (beat) The question is... now that you're here... what do we do with you?
 Professor... I think there's something you should be made aware of...
 Not adrift, Professor. The Enterprise is a Starship, capable of travelling through space.
 We can give you books that will help...
 I hope you'll plan on staying aboard for a while... we'd still like to understand more about what's happened to you.
 I feel it necessary to warn you that criminal behavior is no more acceptable in the twenty-fourth century than it was in the nineteenth. And much harder to get away with.
 If that's so, you'll find that there are opportunities available to you that you could never have imagined.
 What is it?
 Professor... you must believe me when I tell you that we don't know how or why you are able to exist off the Holodeck.
 According to the laws of physics, it's impossible. We would have no idea how to do it again.
 Even if we had reason to believe that would be successful... I'm not sure I could sanction it. Please understand, Professor... you are in essence a new life form -- one which we didn't intend to create and don't fully understand. The moral and ethical implications of deliberately creating another like you... are overwhelming.
 I assure you we will make every effort to make you as comfortable as we can --
 Agreed. We don't have enough information about this entire phenomenon to act in a responsible way. (beat) We'll hold off on the Professor's request until we know more.
 Continue your investigations. In the meantime... I'll have to deal with Moriarity.
 I feel I must postpone action... until we learn more.
 Forgive me, Professor, but I wonder why you're in such a hurry... is this woman your partner in some illegal venture?
 You must love her very much...
 Then I would think her safety would be important to you.
 Give us a little time to determine what has happened here. That way we can minimize the risk in bringing her to you. (beat) You wouldn't want to lose her... just because we moved too quickly.
 Picard here.
 On my way.
 How long until they begin to coalesce?
 Mister Worf, launch four Class-A probes toward the planets.
 Mister Worf?
 (puzzled) For what reason?
 Computer, route all command functions to the Bridge.
 Reinitialize them on my authorization.
 Explain.
 What's happened? Who's transferred the voice authorization?
 Professor -- you've put us in a very dangerous situation.
 Those two planets will collide in less than five hours and explode to form a new star. If we don't have navigational control we won't be able to maintain a safe distance -- and this vessel will be destroyed.
 Everything you've done to this point suggests that you want to live as much as we do.
 (firm) We're studying ways to bring her off the Holodeck safely. But five hours is not enough time.
 Mister Data... investigate the possibility of doing what Professor Moriarty has asked.
 In the meantime, there are a few things we have to discuss.
 Professor Moriarty has agreed not to interfere with routine ship operations. As long as he feels we're acting in good faith, we aren't in any immediate danger. Any progress?
 Keep at it -- I need to be able to tell him that we're making progress. Mister La Forge...
 Do you have any idea how Moriarty was able to take control of the ship?
 I want you to find a way to undo whatever he's done... so we can regain control of the ship.
 You wanted to see me?
 Computer, route all command functions to this location.
 Reinitialize them on my authorization.
 Picard Epsilon-seven-nine-three.
 How do you know that?
 Data, if what you're saying is true... then this is not Geordi La Forge. Are you certain?
 Computer, discontinue program.
 Computer, exit.
 (activates combadge) Picard to Bridge.
 What is my present location, Number One?
 No. Thank you, Picard out. (to the others) Our combadges must be locked into the simulation; if that had been the real Commander Riker, he would have given our location as Holodeck Three.
 Mister La Forge, will you excuse us please?
 Data... who is real here?
 Then... from that point on... we have been existing in a Holodeck simulation of the Enterprise -- created by Moriarty.
 I just gave my command codes to the computer... thinking I was regaining control of the ship.
 Since he has never actually left the Holodeck... he'll probably demand that Commander Riker find a way for him to do so. (beat) How long until the planetary collision?
 As long as Moriarty has control of the ship -- we are vulnerable. (beat) Somehow, we have to find a way to give him what he wants.
 Computer, resume program.
 Captain Jean-Luc Picard.
 No, thank you. (beat) I've come to prevail upon your intelligence and insight.
 Credit where it is due, Madame. You are clearly a woman not only of breeding, but of wit and sagacity.
 And do you suspect that is my intent?
 What does a woman like you see in a man like Professor Moriarty?
 He is also an arch criminal.
 Then it is your desire to leave the Holodeck in order to be with him.
 I can. We've learned that if we uncouple the Transporter's Heisenberg Compensators and allow them to rescramble randomly, we can beam a Holodeck object... or a person... off the grid -- with all the cohesion of conventional matter.
 Wait... I came to you with this information because I believe you are someone who will listen to a reasonable proposition. Whose mind is open to compromise.
 My ship is in danger... it is imperative that I regain navigational control. You must convince Moriarty to return voice commands to me... or we will not modify the Transporter.
 Once I have voice command, I promise we will transport you from the Holodeck.
 Please understand -- I am responsible for the lives of over a thousand people.
 (off-screen) Computer...
 Store program Picard delta one in active memory and discontinue simulation.
 It worked... they believed they were off the Holodeck.
 We'll soon find out. Computer... discontinue the Holodeck simulation created by Professor Moriarty.
 (activates combadge) Picard to Bridge.
 Yes, Number One. What is your status?
 And the planetary collision?
 We'll join you shortly.
 We're all right, Mister Worf.
 We were able to program the Holodeck inside the Holodeck, and use the same ruse on Moriarty that he used on us.
 (gesturing to the cube) The simulation is continuing even now, inside that cube.
 They'll live out their lives... and never know the difference.
 In a sense. And... who knows -- our reality might not be all that different from theirs. All this... (gestures around him) ... might be nothing more than an elaborate simulation being run inside a little device... sitting on someone else's table...
 Well... I believe we have a new born star to study. (standing; indicating the cube) Mister Barclay... you'll see that is kept in a safe place?
 Captain's Log, Stardate 46461.3. The Enterprise has entered the Ipai Sector, where we are scheduled to deliver supplies to a remote communication relay station near the Klingon border.
 console.
 Life signs?
 Do you have any idea what killed her?
 There hasn't been a Klingon raid against the Federation in over seven years. (beat) I don't want to risk a diplomatic incident until we have more evidence.
 (to Riker) Get Rocha's personnel file from Starfleet Command. And ask Starbase Two-Twelve to help search for that shuttle.
 (to Beverly) Keep me apprised.
 Perhaps Morag was the one interested in obtaining the encrypted messages.
 Very well. In the meantime, I'll talk to the Klingon Governor about Commander Morag.
 Enterprise to Commander Riker.
 The Klingon ship Qu'Vat has arrived with Governor Torak. Please report to the Observation Lounge.
 Torak claims to be bringing evidence that the Klingons had no involvement in the murder of Lieutenant Uhnari.
 This should be an interesting meeting.
 Governor. Welcome aboard...
 Lieutenant... why didn't you contact Starfleet and report what happened aboard the Station?
 Governor Torak... we are merely exploring all the possibilities. Lieutenant Uhnari's logs said Commander Morag was harassing the station --
 If he was only doing his job, then I'm sure you won't mind if we speak with him.
 What have you found out about Uhnari?
 Why?
 You think she lied?
 As of now, we don't have sufficient evidence one way or the other... I want you to examine her shuttle... perhaps there's something there which will shed some light on her story.
 Could a high level phaser blast have caused this kind of DNA disruption?
 Captain's Log: Supplemental. The Qu'Vat has arrived with Commander Morag. We are preparing to question him regarding his involvement in the murder of Lieutenant Rocha.
 Did you kill Lieutenant Rocha?
 Governor, we would like Commander Morag to remain aboard the Enterprise until our investigation is complete.
 (re: hand) You said it was formed from the organic matter found in the deckplate?
 (re: hand) Doctor... what exactly is this?
 If what you're saying is true... Rocha attacked Uhnari because he needed a new body...
 (to computer) Computer -- locate Commander Morag and Lieutenant Uhnari.
 Captain's Log, Stardate 46519.1. We have arrived at Research Station seventy-five to take on a rather unique passenger... one whose homecoming will undoubtedly be difficult.
 At ease... and it's Captain, actually.
 You said it was important that I see you.
 What kind of cargo?
 This is why you've returned... to bring this message?
 In order to know whether Spock's message is being delivered accurately... I need to understand the messenger.
 And yet you found something very appealing about it at one time.
 But not any longer...
 (to COM) Mister Riker. Set course for the Kaleb sector. Warp eight.
 (puzzled) Ensign, verify our position.
 That's one possibility. (beat) Mister Worf, bring Ensign DeSeve to my Ready Room.
 Well, Mister DeSeve. You promised me a freighter with an important cargo. The only thing here is empty space. Do you have an explanation?
 You said the message came directly from Ambassador Spock?
 What does that mean?
 It would be risky to set a trap here, so close to Federation space... but the fact remains -- there is no freighter. (beat) Ensign DeSeve, did your contact tell you anything else that might be helpful?
 Why didn't you mention this earlier?
 Perhaps now would be a good time to start. Gentlemen, come with me.
 Mister Data, initiate a phase three search pattern -- radius fifteen light years.
 (gesturing to chair on his left) Ensign DeSeve, I want you to stay right here. In case you recall anything else that might have slipped your mind.
 Could they have had some sort of malfunction... a reactor core breach?
 Then... the Romulans could still be in the vicinity.
 (to DeSeve) Whatever cargo was on that freighter, the Romulans didn't want it to reach us. Are you sure you don't know what it was?
 All we seem to have here are questions. (beat) Mister Data, continue scanning the area.
 Analysis.
 Mister Data, could this distortion be caused by a cloaked ship?
 Mister DeSeve, is it your opinion that we're picking up a cloaked Romulan ship?
 (after a beat) Mister Data, continue your scan. (to conn) Helm, link navigational control to Mister Data's console. Plot an intercept course toward that distortion.
 Where is it now, Mister Data... ?
 Stop engines.
 Bearing and speed?
 We don't have the luxury to speculate. (to McKnight) Back us away from that distortion, Ensign. One-half impulse.
 On-screen.
 I am Jean-Luc Picard of the Enterprise.
 A Carvallen freighter was destroyed not far from here... we detected the residual effects of disruptor fire. Can you shed any light on this?
 Still, there was a significant loss of life...
 Yes... I agree.
 Very well. (to com) Mister Worf, lock onto Major Rakal. Transport on my command.
 I don't know... but she needs our help to get back. Mister Worf, keep your lock on her no matter what happens.
 (after a beat) Lower the shields...
 Shields up... stand by phasers. (to Worf) Damage report.
 Mister Worf -- now.
 Ensign, get us out of here -- warp nine.
 The men you helped rescue are safe. Proconsul M'ret is deeply grateful for your help.
 Thanks to the two of you, the way has been paved for other rescue operations. (beat) You can be sure that N'vek's efforts... and his sacrifice... were not in vain.
 What's going on, Q?
 You are not God.
 I don't know what game it is you're playing, but I am not going to participate.
 Q, whatever you've done to --
 How do I know this isn't another one of your tricks?
 Is that what happened?
 The conference...
 No. I am not dead. I refuse to believe there is an afterlife which is run by you. (beat) The universe is not that badly designed.
 (shocked) Father...
 All right, Q... enough.
 (hard) Q, stop this.
 I hope you're enjoying this, Q.
 I find it hard to believe that you're doing this for the benefit of my soul.
 "Some time together?"... how much time?
 So I'm in hell.
 If I'm truly dead, then my only regret is dying... and finding you here.
 Is that...
 (quiet) It was a... mistake.
 (finally admitting) I regret a great many things from those days...
 No, it wasn't.
 I was... a different person in those days... an arrogant, undisciplined, young man with far too much ego and far too little wisdom. (beat) I was more like you.
 The only pity is that I had to be impaled through the back before I learned my lesson. (beat) I started that fight with the Nausicaans... I started it because I was young and cocky...
 If I had been more responsible at that age... I wouldn't have needed this heart... and I wouldn't have died from a random energy surge thirty years later.
 (quiet) Things would be different...
 Cortan? Cortan Zweller?
 Marta...
 I'm... just a little disoriented...
 I'll... catch up with you later.
 No, no. I'm fine Marta -- Marty, really.
 (irritated) Q...
 What's the point of creating this... fantasy?
 I don't look it.
 I thought you said I was dead... now you tell me I'm alive?
 Let's say for the moment that it's true... what purpose does it serve to bring me here?
 Change. You mean change the past. Q, even if you have brought me back in time somehow... surely you must realize that any alteration in this timeline could have a profound impact on the future --
 I won't do it. I won't alter history.
 Starbase Earhart... we came here just after graduation... to wait for our first deep space assignments.
 So then I won't die?
 What if I don't avoid the fight... what if I don't make any changes?
 Wonderful.
 That woman's name was... Corlina. I was supposed to take her to dinner... on this night... (beat) But then she found out that... (embarrassed) I'd made a second date with another woman... named Penny. Corlina was... somewhat upset.
 Computer, what time is it?
 In fact, Penny should be... waiting for me... right now.
 Nothing. I'm just a little more... contemplative.
 Penny, perhaps we could just... talk for a while. I don't know anything about you... where you come from... what your interests are... your last name...
 Penny... I don't think it would be fair... to you to pretend that I'm really interested in a... relationship right now...
 What? No, not at all. You're a very... handsome woman.
 Penny. To me you are definitely not an old lady.
 I was a puerile adolescent who let himself be ruled by his hormones instead of his head.
 Of course.
 (beat) She... decided to leave.
 (quiet, urgent) No, don't play him.
 It'll cause trouble.
 He's a Nausicaan... they can be very ill-tempered when they lose.
 (forcefully) Corey, listen to me. This is a bad idea. Don't play him.
 Sorry to disappoint you.
 He's going to lose. The Nausicaan is cheating.
 If history repeats itself, Corey will figure it out later tonight and then he'll want revenge.
 I did the first time. I found a way to rig the table so that Corey could win in a rematch.
 It was a foolish mistake. The Nausicaan and his two friends didn't take the loss very well. They were outraged... they wanted a fight... (beat) And I gave them one.
 It may have simply been extraordinary luck.
 That won't solve anything.
 What it will do is provoke him. And provoking a Nausicaan is not a good idea.
 What if he's not alone... what if he brings some friends along next time?
 Corey... there must be a better way to handle this...
 We're not cadets anymore... we're officers. We have to start... setting a higher standard for ourselves.
 No. I'm sorry Corey, but I won't do it.
 I hope so.
 What?
 (dry) That would be more in character, wouldn't it?
 (ironic) Maybe I'm just getting... a little older.
 (ironic) It's going to take some getting used to.
 Of course.
 Come.
 No, you did not.
 We were friends, nothing more.
 My friendship with Marta is not something I regret.
 (irritably) What do you want, Q?
 (softly) Corey...
 Sorry.
 I'm not here to help you, I'm here to stop you from making a serious mistake.
 Cheating the Nausicaan could have serious consequences for all of us. It's a risk we can't afford to take.
 (hard) This isn't a joke, Corey.
 I said you're not doing this.
 No. (beat) But I will tell the gambling foreman that someone's been tampering with his Dom-Jot table.
 I just couldn't make him understand.
 Yes, but... he didn't take it very well.
 I hope so. We were friends for many years after this. (off her look) Or at least... I hope we will be.
 (puzzled) You keep smiling at me.
 Do I really seem that different?
 Really?
 Actually... I have. For a long time.
 I... don't know. (beat) At the moment... I can't imagine why I didn't...
 I don't have anything to feel guilty about, Q.
 You're the one who gave me the opportunity to change things...
 I don't know. But I do know that things will be different.
 Morning.
 What's wrong?
 I suppose so.
 Marta... I don't regret what happened last night... and I hope you don't, either.
 I hope last night has only brought us closer.
 (smiles) Very well.
 (remembering) ... One of you isn't going to make it through the next four years.
 Perhaps we should just... pretend that this never happened and try to...
 I don't want you to do anything that'll be uncomfortable...
 (to Corey) I think you'll like serving aboard the Ajax... I understand Captain Narth is an excellent officer.
 (lifts a glass) Well... here's to the class of 'twenty-seven.
 I don't think we're interested.
 (to Corey) Don't be a fool. (to Nausicaan) There are plenty of other people to play Dom-Jot. Go on about your business.
 Corey, I'm sorry. He was drawing a weapon...
 Worf...
 (to himself) What's happened... ?
 I'm not sure... (beat, then to Worf) Mister Worf, what's my rank and position?
 Who's the Captain of this ship?
 (quickly) No. I think I can find my way. Thank you, Commander.
 Beverly, something's happened to me. I'm not sure --
 Q, what have you done?
 This is not the present I remember. You said nothing would change.
 (remembering PADD) I have the... spectral analysis for you.
 What's going on?
 Have you tried flushing the transfer conduits with trioxina?
 The conduits sometimes get blocked by neutrino emissions when the plasma --
 Am I interrupting?
 (to Riker) I wonder if I could talk with you for a moment... about my future on the Enterprise.
 No, please Counselor... I would very much like to hear your thoughts...
 First of all... I'd like you to be straightforward with me. How do you evaluate me as an officer?
 I see. (beat) What would you say if I told you I thought I was capable of being more than that...
 I'd very much appreciate it if we could discuss it now.
 I would like to try... to move beyond astrophysics... into engineering or security perhaps. Something which might even lead to a command.
 Why?
 Please. This is important to me. I know I can do more.
 Would that be your evaluation as well, Commander?
 I see.
 Just not -- one who stands out.
 But... command?
 (quietly) All right, Q. Enough of this. You've made your point.
 Q... ?
 (to com, resigned) I'm on my way, sir.
 (to com) Main Engineering.
 Are you having a good laugh now, Q? Does it amuse you to think of me living out the rest of my life as a dreary man in a tedious job?
 I can't live out my days as that person. That man is bereft of passion and imagination. That's not who I am.
 You're right. You gave me the chance to change and I took that opportunity. But I freely admit now that it was a mistake.
 Yes. (beat) Give me a chance to put things back to the way they were before.
 I would rather die as the man I was... than live the life I just saw.
 Please.
 What did you say?
 That's what I thought you said.
 ... I still don't know what to make of it all. Was it a dream? Or one of Q's elaborate tricks?
 Part of me cannot accept the idea that Q would have given me a second chance... that he would demonstrate that much... compassion. (beat) But if it was Q... I owe him a debt of gratitude.
 There were many things in my youth that I'm not proud of... they were loose threads... untidy parts of myself that I wanted to remove. (beat) But when I pulled on one of those threads... I unravelled the tapestry of my life.
 Well, to tell the truth... that wasn't the first time I'd had a run-in with a couple of surly Nausicaans...
 Oh, yes... (beat) During my sophomore year I was assigned to do some training on Morikin Seven. Well, there was a Nausicaan outpost on one of the outlying asteroids...
 Captain's Log, Stardate 46578.4. The Enterprise has arrived at Station Deep Space Nine, where we will assist in the reconstruction of the Bajoran aqueduct systems damaged during the Cardassian occupation.
 walking down the street, past the storefronts and activity. Picard is carrying a briefcase; Beverly has a medical kit. Mid-conversation.
 I'm afraid I won't have the time. I'll be too busy discussing the finer points of water management with ten Bajoran bureaucrats. (beat) And they won't be carrying me on chromal vapor...
 Come.
 Yes, Mister Data?
 Not at all. I'm just studying the intricacies of Bajoran aqueduct management... (lightly) I could use an interruption about now. Please, sit down.
 Oh yes... of course... your "vision" of Doctor Soong. How's your investigation coming along?
 What have you found?
 I'm curious. Why are you looking at all these other cultures?
 Yes you do. You are a culture of one. And that's no less valid than a culture of one billion.
 (continuing) Perhaps the key to understanding your experience is to stop looking into other sources for meaning... (explains) You wouldn't look at Michaelangelo's David... or Symnay's Tomb... and ask "what does this mean to other people?" The real question is, "what does it mean to you?"
 (with emphasis) Explore the image, Data. Let it capture your imagination. Focus on it... spend some time with it... and see where it takes you. Let it inspire you.
 Good luck, Data.
 Captain's Log, Stardate 46580.1. The Yridian vessel Lieutenant Worf boarded at Deep Space Nine has failed to arrive for our scheduled rendezvous. It is now twelve hours overdue.
 and various N.D's are at their posts.
 Contact DS Nine -- find out what they know about this Yridian trader.
 (nods) That's the only chance we have of finding Worf.
 When Worf asked for leave... I had the feeling he was hoping none of it was true: that his father was dead, that he hadn't been captured.
 I'm sure that's true. (beat) But if Mogh... or any other Klingon... had been held prisoner for twenty years... would they want to be found?
 What is it, Number One?
 Are any of these systems near Romulan space?
 Let's head for the closer one.
 Captain's Log, Stardate 46581.5. We have scanned the planets of the Nequencia system and found no evidence of a Romulan prison camp. We are now enroute to the Carraya system, closer to Romulan space.
 Input the coordinates and change course.
 Thank you, Doctor.
 Welcome home, Lieutenant.
 (to com) Picard to Bridge. Signal the Romulan ship that we have the last group on board.
 I see you found what you were looking for, Mister Worf.
 I understand, Mister Worf.
 Captain's log, Stardate 46682.4. The Enterprise is docked at the Remmler Array, where it will undergo a routine procedure to eliminate accumulated baryon particles. In preparation for the sweep, we are evacuating the ship.
 No. Open up the Transporters in Cargo Bay Two and divert everyone from deck seven there. That should get us back on track.
 Have Mister LaForge transport a stasis unit from the astrophysics lab. You should be able to convert it to store tissue samples.
 I think we can resume the sequence. Counselor Troi is taking care of the situation on deck seven.
 Mister Data. (as he faces front) Bridge.
 Yes it has.
 (more of the same) Exactly.
 Data -- are you alright?
 (thinks) Small talk?
 Perhaps it was a little too... non-relevant. However, if you're interested in small talk keep your eye on Commander Hutchinson during the reception this afternoon... (not looking forward to it) ... he's a master.
 We're running out of time, gentlemen. Mister Worf?
 Are we ready, Mister La Forge?
 (concerned) Additional units?
 (understanding) And that might overload the field diverters protecting our key systems. How long until the new ones are in place?
 Very well. (to com) Computer, disable all command functions in thirty minutes. Authorization: Picard gamma-six-zero-seven-three.
 In my Ready Room.
 Permission granted. I only wish I could excuse myself as well.
 Sorry, Mister LaForge... I can't excuse the entire senior staff. Worf beat you to it.
 Go ahead, Mister Orton.
 Confirmed.
 Tell him... I'm looking forward to it.
 Commander.
 Geordi! Deanna! I don't believe you've met our host. (to Hutchinson) Allow me to introduce Commander Geordi La Forge, Counselor Deanna Troi. This is Commander Hutchinson.
 Horses?
 That sounds... perfect. (beat, then to Geordi) How long until the baryon sweep begins on the Enterprise?
 Then I'll have time to get my saddle.
 Yes. (notices their looks) A saddle is a very personal thing. It has to be broken in... worn... cared for...
 Yes. (beat) I've had it since the Academy. (beat) I never know when I'll have the opportunity to ride.
 It's perfectly normal. Most serious riders have their own saddles.
 If you'll excuse me.
 Somone left this ODN junction box open. (beat) I thought your crew was supposed to leave the ship once the field diverters were in place.
 I see. Well, I suppose I'd better let you finish up so you can get off the ship.
 Who are you? What are you doing on my ship.
 (unfazed) You're probably right.
 But I'm willing to bet that this will.
 (continuing) What's going on in Main Engineering?
 I suggest you cooperate.
 Are you sure?
 (to Devor) I guess you're right.
 My name is Mott. I'm... the barber.
 I... I know. But, I wanted to go riding and I didn't have my saddle, so I came back --
 That's right. I left it in the corridor on deck seven. When the power went off, I got lost and didn't know where to go so --
 (meekly) Sure, okay. You don't need to point that at me.
 (firm, into communicator) Kelsey. Don't be a fool. You know better than to try moving that resin.
 You may call me whatever you wish, but moving trilithium resin requires very specific equipment. You can't simply improvise something.
 I would rather destroy this ship than allow that material to fall into the hands of terrorists.
 Trilithium resin is a highly toxic waste material produced by our engines. There's no possible use for it except as a weapon.
 (to com) There are only so many ways to Ten Forward... and Ten Forward is the only logical place to go if you want to stay ahead of the Baryon sweep.
 (to com) I plan on leaving the same way you do... on your ship.
 Come on, Kelsey. If you've been planning this for so long, you must have a way to get off the Enterprise and leave this system. I think there's a ship coming for you. And I plan to be on it.
 I'm sorry to hear that... I'll send your regrets.
 He's not dead.
 Kelsey -- perhaps we can work out a deal.
 My name's not Mott. It's Jean-Luc Picard.
 Leave the trilithium here and take me with you. You can use me as a hostage instead of threatening --
 Profit. This is all about profit.
 (to com) Arkaria base, this is Captain Picard. Deactivate the baryon sweep. (urgent) This is Captain Picard on the Enterprise. Deactivate the baryon sweep immediately.
 (keys it) Picard here.
 Yes.
 (beat; low) I know they won't get very far.
 (to Troi, very concerned) Any luck?
 (takes saddle) Thank you.
 It came in very handy. (beat) I just wish I'd had a chance to use it on a horse.
 Good evening, Mister Data.
 No need to report. I'm just here to do some work of my own.
 I'd like to talk to Doctor Mowray at his archaeological site on Landris Two. Please put it through to my Ready Room.
 How long will it be?
 No, no... it's not important.
 Computer, display the latest excavation schematics from Landris Two.
 Explain.
 Tea, Earl Grey. Hot.
 Stellar Cartography...
 (to himself) What could they possibly be doing down there... ?
 You might've taken the simple precaution of locking the door.
 You must be Lieutenant Commander Daren.
 You're new aboard the Enterprise. I think you'll soon learn to start expecting the unexpected.
 Excellent. Now perhaps you could tell me what was so important that it required depriving the ship's Captain of a cup of Earl Grey?
 I look forward to sampling them.
 (eyeing the console) What are these readings for?
 (a wry smile) That's a long time to wait to find out if you're right.
 I understand it has unusual radioactive emissions -- I'm sure Stellar Sciences will find it an interesting study.
 You have the Bridge, Number One.
 (nods) I'll be there.
 ... the upshot is... we'll be close enough for you to slip away for a few days and see Wesley.
 It's an herbal tea blend... (beat) I came across it in the replicator files.
 Have you met any of the new crewmembers we took on at Starbase Two-eighteen?
 (casually) I met the new head of Stellar Sciences last night. Lieutenant Commander Daren.
 Very.
 (smiles) That's wonderful, Beverly.
 (smiles) That journal is widely read. You'll probably be swamped with responses. (beat) Did you know it's possible now to predict the configuration of a star system that won't be formed for another two million years?
 It's quite intriguing. It's made possible by a rather complex mathematical construct based on fractal particle motion. And of course that's just the foundation... the modeling itself requires gravimetric wave inputs.
 Well, I'm sure it sounds dry. Stellar cartography isn't everyone's cup of tea...
 Well... we'd better get to Ten Forward; we don't want to be late for the concert.
 Your playing was remarkable.
 That was obvious.
 I played piano for a while when I was young. But I never put in the practice time it takes to become truly proficient.
 I wanted to ask you... during the second arpeggio in the first movement, I noticed you played an F minor chord instead of a diminished D.
 I'm very much an amateur. But I must say, your choice in that arpeggio was delightful. Not at all what one expects to hear.
 End playback.
 Come.
 (surprised) Commander Daren.
 I'm delighted. Come in.
 It's Ressikan.
 They're not made anymore.
 A long time...
 I'm not very good.
 Yes, but I wouldn't want to inflict it on anyone else.
 You're not holding it quite right...
 (dismissing this) Please...
 There's... no piano here.
 Remarkable... (hoping to get out of this) Why don't you play something for me?
 What... shall we play?
 Bach... the third Brandenburg.
 Sorry...
 Just the computer.
 Number One... my sparring partner cancelled for this afternoon. I was wondering if you wanted to join me?
 It doesn't matter... as long as you enjoy it.
 (pleased) Excellent. Fourteen hundred hours, then.
 Where are we going?
 I don't see why we can't just practice in my quarters.
 (looking around) The fourth intersect of Jefferies Tube twenty-five.
 How did you find it?
 Don't tell me you climbed through every tube on the ship?
 Just an old folk melody.
 I'm told there are nuances only Kerelians can hear -- we don't have the ears for it.
 Very good, Commander.
 Is the outpost in any danger?
 (standing) Counselor, would you join me in my Ready Room?
 You have the Bridge, Number One.
 I wanted to talk to you about a matter of... protocol. (beat) I know there are no Starfleet regulations about a Captain becoming involved with a fellow officer, but...
 It's that obvious?
 But I have to be concerned about more than my own happiness.
 Yes. Relationships with coworkers can be fraught with consequences.
 I've always believed that becoming involved with someone under my command could compromise my objectivity. (beat) And yet...
 If I were... would you give it?
 Nella...
 I'm sorry about what happened this morning in the Turbolift. (he tries to explain) When that crewman walked in I felt... self-conscious. It might take me a while to get used to the idea of the crew seeing us together.
 I promise you... I'm not one for casual relationships.
 There's something I want to tell you...
 (continuing) But not here...
 Do you remember that folk melody I played for you this morning?
 I learned it on a planet called Kataan.
 I'm not surprised. Its sun went nova over a thousand years ago.
 The Enterprise encountered a probe sent from the planet before it was destroyed. The probe scanned me -- I lost consciousness, and in the space of twenty-five minutes... I lived a lifetime there.
 I had a wife... children.
 It was all very real to me.
 (continuing) When I awoke, all that was left of my life there... was the flute I'd taught myself to play.
 Because I want you to understand what my music means to me. (beat) And what it means for me to be able to share it with someone.
 Come.
 Of course. Come in.
 Because of her relationship with me.
 Number One... are her requests unusual?
 Would you say she's just trying to do her job?
 Then let her. (beat) And feel free to do yours.
 Ship's resources are your responsibility. I've always had complete confidence in your judgment.
 It's not that.
 Commander Riker came to talk to me this afternoon. (beat) About you.
 That's what I told him. But we have to be very careful. Obviously it's easy for people to misunderstand.
 All I'm saying is that it's something we have to be aware of. But don't compromise yourself, do what you have to do.
 Because if I find out that the head of Stellar Sciences isn't effective anymore, I'll do what I have to do... (smiles) I'll replace her.
 I suggest we forget about this and enjoy the evening.
 Ah, yes. (he stands) A concoction I first sampled on Thelka Four...
 On my way.
 Captain's Log, Stardate 46693.1. We have entered the Bersallis star system and are making preparations to evacuate the Federation Outpost on the third planet.
 Let's do it.
 Commander Daren... ?
 (continuing) About these thermal deflectors...
 (continuing) It seems to me that any one of a number of people could coordinate their deployment.
 Energize.
 How long before the storm reaches the outpost?
 Go ahead.
 Keep at it, Mister La Forge.
 Go ahead, Doctor.
 Understood, Doctor.
 Number One, how many colonists are left to transport?
 How long do you need?
 Picard to perimeter teams.
 ... It is imperative that you hold your positions until we finish the evacuation of the colony. Picard out.
 Picard to La Forge.
 Keep a signal lock on all perimeter team members.
 As soon as the last of the colonists are evacuated I want those perimeter teams out of there. Is that understood?
 Which teams are missing?
 Go ahead, Mister Worf.
 On my way.
 Captain's Log, Stardate 46697.2. Although we succeeded in rescuing all six hundred forty-three Bersallin colonists... we lost eight crewmembers. Let the record show that they gave their lives in the performance of their duty. Commendations will follow.
 Nella... you know I had to give that order --
 It couldn't have been easy for you... hearing me order you to face death.
 Part of you must have... blamed me.
 I've lost people under my command... people I cared about deeply... but never someone I've been in love with.
 When I thought you were dead, I went into some kind of shutdown... I didn't want to think, I didn't want to feel. I was here, in my quarters, and... the only thing I could focus on was music... and how it would never give me joy again.
 We could continue... hoping we wouldn't face a situation like that again... knowing that we might... hoping the pressures on us wouldn't begin to erode our feelings for each other... (beat) That's not what I want for us.
 (reluctantly) I don't think we can serve on the same ship.
 We can arrange shore leave together.
 Captain's log, Stardate 46731.5. We are in the midst of the Volterra nebula, a stellar "nursery." Our three week mission is a routine analysis of several dozen protostars in various stages of development.
 the aft science station, working his console.
 (to Con) Ensign, lay in a course to the next one, three quarters impulse.
 (to COM) Yes, Number One?
 (to COM) Of course. I'll be right there.
 My God...
 Professor Galen.
 No one is more welcome on my ship.
 (continuing) I never thought I would see a Kurlan naiskos. (to Galen) Fifth Dynasty?
 Please. "Mister" will do just fine.
 (continuing) The overall configuration is certainly Fifth Dynasty. But the surface ornamentation...
 Green polychrome over the eyes... And the eyes themselves... open. (smiles) Third Dynasty. From the workshop of the Master of Tarquin Hill.
 The Master of Tarquin Hill created ceramic designs that were three centuries ahead of his time. We only know him by his work -- his name has never been discovered...
 (continuing) This object is over twelve thousand years old...
 Indeed. I thought you had completed your studies of Kurlan artifacts some time ago.
 It's complete?
 The Kurl believed every individual is a community of individuals. Inside us are many voices, each with its own desires, its own style, its own way of viewing the world.
 (continuing) But Kurlan civilization died out thousands of years ago. It's rare to find a figurine intact. (to the Professor) A truly incredible find.
 How could I accept this --
 How long can you stay? There's so much to talk about.
 Two days? That's not nearly enough time...
 I don't understand.
 Captain's log, supplemental. It has been over thirty years since I last saw my archaeology professor. His presence has taken me back to a time when I had considered a very different career...
 Damning with faint praise.
 I had hoped to see you there. You said in your last letter that you might go.
 Professor Galen, may I ask a frank question?
 Your published writings have been... sporadic over the last ten years or so. Your appearances at symposia have been rare -- or scheduled and then cancelled at the last minute. The finest archaeologist of the century has become shrouded with an air of mystery.
 (smiles) I've yet to run across anyone that didn't love a good mystery.
 Professor, what have you been doing for the last decade?
 (nods) Studying fossil records at a microscopic level. I remember reading your papers on the subject. But that was years ago... Then your work seemed to stop.
 Tell me --
 For how long?
 Why can't you do this without me?
 Professor, I'm honored that you'd think of me. But I have a responsibility --
 May I sleep on it?
 "Dream not of today." The night blessing of the Yash-El.
 I've had a few years to look it up. (beat) The Enterprise is yours, for as long as you're here.
 (continuing) Dream not of today, Professor.
 Come.
 Yes.
 I had a long talk with Professor Galen last night. He asked me to leave the Enterprise -- to join him on an archaeological expedition that could last a year.
 I wouldn't leave the Enterprise. But the offer itself has made me feel a certain... regret.
 Not exactly. I'm certainly not sorry about the path I've taken...
 (continuing) But... there's a certain... passion that comes with the singleminded pursuit of the past.
 (continuing) To be captured by an image created by another's hand, hundreds or thousands of years ago. A being long dead, who still speaks to you through that image, who says "I was alive, as you are alive."
 (continuing) I've only approximated that feeling. Professor Galen made it his life.
 (continuing) The Professor didn't choose this figure at random -- the many voices inside the one. He knows that the past is one of the most insistent voices inside me. This gift was meant to remind me of that.
 I wouldn't trade it for anything. And I'd still make the same decision I made all those years ago. (beat) I'm just sorry I have to say no to him a second time.
 I had a father. But Professor Galen was like a father who understood me. And he had children -- but none followed in his footsteps. So, I was like the son who understood him.
 The Professor is somewhat... internal. He doesn't express feelings easily. But it was difficult for me.
 (continuing) In some ways, I wish he'd never come on board.
 Professor.
 I'm afraid I won't be going.
 (continuing) The Enterprise isn't something I can leave and then come back to. If I go, I go for good. I'm not prepared to do that.
 You can't believe that my career in Starfleet has been a mistake.
 We both know that isn't true.
 I never wanted --
 I can't.
 You aren't scheduled to rendezvous with the Vulcan ship for two days...
 Captain's Log, supplemental. We have completed our mission in the nebula and are en route to a diplomatic conference on Atalia Seven. I must admit that I have lost my enthusiasm for those proceedings.
 Locate the call's origin and set course, warp eight.
 Take us out of warp. On screen.
 Get him out of there.
 Return phaser fire, disable their offensive systems.
 (to COM) Transporter Room One, lock onto Professor Galen and transport him directly to Sickbay...
 What were they after?
 What do they mean?
 Apparently, the Yridians knew more about the Professor's work than we do. (re: Viewscreen) They may have known what these numbers mean.
 Not necessarily. The Yridians are information dealers. They could have been delivering the number blocks to someone else. Did they send any signals before they were destroyed?
 Do the shuttle's flight logs show where Galen had been before coming on board the Enterprise?
 What's the distance from our current position?
 The conference can wait. (beat) Lay in a course to the Ruah system.
 (beat) Scan for any evidence of monuments or earth works which might suggest an ancient civilization.
 Then what was the most renowned archaeologist in the Federation doing here?
 When he left the Enterprise, he was going to take a Vulcan ship to Deep Space Four. And from there... (trying to recall) An Al-Leyan transport as far as Caere... Then the shuttle to... Indri Eight.
 Mister Data, what do we know about Indri Eight?
 Number One, we'll proceed to Indri Eight.
 (sharply) I know Starfleet's timetable. (beat; indicates screen) Professor Galen visited this planet only days ago. And he was headed to Indri Eight when he was killed. There is a connection between the two planets. And I'm going to find it.
 Come.
 It's not. (indicates screen) I thought if I stared at these number blocks long enough I might start to see some kind of pattern.
 (re: screen) Nothing.
 As well as can be expected, given the circumstances.
 If I had only gone with him --
 Yes, I realize that.
 Counselor, this isn't a case of my taking the Enterprise and its crew on some wild goose chase in order to purge myself of guilt or remorse. (beat) I simply will not allow Galen's death to be in vain. If that means inconveniencing a group of squabbling delegates for a few more days, then so be it. The responsibility is mine.
 On my way.
 Mister Worf, onscreen.
 Can we stop it?
 All the life... (beat then to others) What if the Professor's number blocks have something to do with organic material?
 (on the move) I'll be in the lab.
 (reacts, amazed) DNA fragments!
 The planets these fragments come from are scattered across the quadrant. No wonder it took the Professor years to collect them. But why?
 How can that be possible? They're different species... from different planets. There shouldn't be any compatibility at all.
 (amazed) What is it?
 An algorithm? Are you saying these DNA fragments are elements of some kind of computer program?
 So four billion years ago, someone scattered this genetic material into the primordial soup of at least nineteen different planets across the galaxy.
 (to Geordi) Do you have any idea what this program could be designed to do?
 Then they must be from worlds outside the Federation. (beat) How many people aboard the Enterprise come from non-Federation planets?
 It may be a long shot, but we ought to check each of those seventeen people to see if any of them have the correct protein configurations.
 To keep anyone else from getting that piece of the puzzle.
 It's four billion years old... a computer program from a highly advanced civilization... hidden in the fabric of life itself. (beat) Whatever information is contained in that program could be the most profound discovery of our time. Or the most dangerous. And the Professor knew that.
 I've gone through every page of the Professor's published work... hoping I'd find a clue about where to go next... but so far nothing.
 (remembering) "I was in the neighborhood."
 (continuing) When I asked the Professor what took him all the way to Kurl, he said he was "in the neighborhood." Doing what?
 The only planet near the Kurlan system capable of supporting life is Loren Three.
 (to COM) Mister Data, set course for Loren Three, maximum warp.
 There's a good chance our competition has gotten here first. Battle stations, Mister Worf.
 On screen.
 (to screen) I'm Captain Jean-Luc Picard of the Enterprise. And I fail to see why I should explain my presence to you. Cardassia has no claims on this sector.
 Not at all. But the Enterprise is on a purely scientific mission. You have nothing to gain by interfering with us.
 Captain's log, supplemental. It seems that we have not one, but two competitors in our attempt to complete Professor Galen's puzzle. I have prevailed upon the Cardassian and Klingon Captains to meet with me.
 I believe we all know why we're here. If we admit that much, we can move forward.
 There's no point in trying to deceive each other... we all know about Professor Galen's research and about the computer program which is composed of DNA fragments.
 I'll take your silence as confirmation. Now, it stands to reason that no one has all the DNA fragments necessary to complete the program. (to Cardassian) You were the first to arrive in this system. Do you have an organic sample from the planet below?
 (ignoring him) I believe one of you also has a fragment from Indri Eight.
 He destroyed the planet's biosphere after taking the sample.
 All of us are missing some of the fragments... but not necessarily the same ones. Unless we combine what we have, we'll never learn the secret of this program.
 Until we assemble the entire program no on can know its ultimate purpose.
 Enough. Without cooperation we will get nowhere.
 If you both bring the fragments you possess to the Enterprise, I will combine them with ours. The result will be observed by all parties simultaneously, giving no one the advantage.
 Then this endeavor stops dead, right here in this room.
 And I think we're very close, indeed.
 This is a... jigsaw puzzle... whose pieces have been scattered across the galaxy. (beat) Doesn't it seem reasonable to assume that the original designers meant for someone to find this puzzle -- why else would they put the pieces in our DNA? (MORE)
 (beat) And doesn't that in turn suggest that they would try to make it easy for us to find all the pieces? That there might be some... pattern to their distribution?
 Doctor, program the computer to analyze the distribution pattern of the pieces we have, correcting for changes in star configurations over four billion years... and extrapolate for the missing piece.
 If you wish, you may stay on board while we wait.
 What is it, Geordi?
 Report, Number One.
 It's not going to take them very long to realize that Rahm-Izad is the wrong planet. (to Nu'Daq) You're welcome to join us, Captain.
 Ensign, plot a course to the Vilmoran System. Warp nine.
 Any sign of the Cardassians?
 (to COM) Acknowledged.
 (touches COM) Wait for my order, Number One.
 You've been shadowing us ever since.
 (sotto) The seabed... it may be only partially fossilized... it could still contain organic material.
 (to Beverly, sotto) The program has activated... (beat) I think it's reconfiguring the tricorder... it's modifying the emitter diode to project something...
 (touches COM) Picard to Enterprise. Away Team is ready to beam up.
 Captain's log, Stardate 46735.2. Our frequent use of high warp over the last few days has overextended the propulsion systems. We are finishing minor repairs before returning to Federation territory.
 I don't know of anyone who would have appreciated it more.
 It would've been a more fitting legacy if the message had not fallen on deaf ears.
 Both of us.
 (to COM) Put it through.
 Until then.
 Yes.
 One day...
 (nods) It's in a state of total anarchy. When the Prime Minister was assassinated, a Federation research team was on the planet. It is believed they were forced to go into hiding... (beat) Your mission will be to locate and evacuate them.
 There are no local authorities. The government's been splintered -- several factions are vying for power. And they're desperate for weapons or technology of any kind... (beat) Apparently, some factions are resorting to torture to gather information. A Starfleet research team would be a prime target.
 Agreed. Mister Worf is ready to give you a detailed briefing on Tilonian culture.
 No, no... you'll have plenty of time for that, Number One. We won't be arriving at Tilonus for another five days. (beat) Besides, if you back out now, Beverly will come after me to play the part.
 It was dark and cold because... I was outdoors... at night... in a narrow space... (thinks) I was walking through an alley.
 Someone must have followed me into the alley. That's why I started to walk faster. Then someone grabbed me from behind...
 Three. They were humanoid. I could only make out one of their faces...
 We're your colleagues. Trust us. It's going to be alright...
 Wil, please --
 (gentle) Number One... do you remember what happened?
 (continuing) You were abducted during your mission to Tilonus Four. You were taken to a psychiatric hospital...
 (to Riker) We've done some checking on the hospital Administrator...
 That's right. It appears he's involved with one of the rival factions. We believe he was responsible for what happened to you...
 Wil, what are you doing?
 But what if this isn't a fantasy? Are you willing to take that chance?
 Captain's Log, Stardate 46778.1. Commander Riker has returned safely from his mission to Tilonus Four, where he was being held captive by one of the rival factions. Doctor Crusher has repaired the damage to his long term memory. His recovery is proceeding well.
 (to Riker) Evidently, you were abducted two days after beaming to the surface.
 We believe they were trying to extract strategic information from your memory using a neuro-somatic technique.
 Get some rest, Number One. We can talk more in the morning.
 T'Pan, Christopher, Reyga, and Kurak. They are scattered at the various Aft stations. Beverly is monitoring environmental conditions in the cabin.
 On screen. Open a channel.
 (continuing) Congratulations, Doctor. This is an amazing achievement.
 Doctor Jo'Bril, can you hear us? Please respond.
 Mister Worf, can we beam him out of there?
 Doctor Jo'Bril... listen to me. It is imperative that you turn the shuttle... take it out of the corona... (beat) Do you understand what I'm saying?
 Pilot the shuttle away from the star...
 Get a lock on him as soon as you can, Mister Worf.
 How's it going?
 Do you have any idea what it was?
 Were the solar radiation levels high enough to have killed him?
 The answers will come, Beverly...
 You've been at this for hours... You might think more clearly if you get a good night's sleep.
 Are you doing it for Reyga... or yourself?
 You're the loneliest person in the world right now... no one can say anything... no one can do anything that will help. You don't think it'll ever go away. (beat) And you're right. It never does. But you can live with it. It doesn't feel that way now, but you can.
 I respect your instincts, of course... but by your own admission, Reyga was not an easy man to understand. Isn't it possible that he was simply masking his feelings?
 I'm sure it's difficult for you to accept. You championed him... you believed in his invention...
 Beverly... I know what you're going through. I know what it's like to feel -- responsible for a tragedy. I know the temptation to look for anything that would remove some of that culpability...
 I'm afraid there won't be an autopsy.
 The family has already been contacted... they insist the body must not be touched before they perform the Ferengi death rituals.
 To the family, that is irrelevant.
 I promise you -- they are adamant. We're scheduled to rendezvous with a Ferengi ship in seventeen hours. They will be picking up Reyga's body then. (beat) I'm sorry. But there will be no autopsy.
 If you can find evidence of that... in some way other than an autopsy... I'll consider it.
 Come.
 Beverly. What can I do for you?
 And what did you find?
 You most certainly should not. I made it clear to you that the family expressly prohibited it. You have not only disobeyed my order, you have interfered in the death rituals of another culture.
 You've put both of us in a very difficult position. (beat) The family will have to be notified. And I have no doubt that they will react strongly.
 If the Ferengi government gets into it... and I'm certain they will... there might be some significant repercussions. (beat) I'm not sure how much I could protect you.
 I'm not surprised.
 On screen.
 Open a hailing frequency.
 Beverly... what do you think you're doing?
 A theory?
 Return to the ship immediately.
 Mister Worf -- override the shuttle's computer. Return it to the shuttlebay.
 Mister Data, what's her heading?
 Beverly. What do you hope to accomplish?
 You can't be certain of that. You're betting your life on a hypothesis.
 Beverly -- what's happening?
 (to Data) All right... begin a phase-one search, starting on the last known coordinates of the shuttlecraft... (to conn) Ensign, plot a proximity course to --
 He had no explanation at all?
 (surprised) Oh?
 Where's Worf now?
 You have the Bridge, Number One.
 (hard) On your feet, Lieutenant.
 (firm) Mister Worf, your personal affairs are strictly your concern unless they interfere with the operation of this ship. You've crossed that line. Now as your Captain, I want to know exactly what's going on.
 Try.
 Does this have something to do with the Klingons you... rescued from Carraya Four?
 Is that what you were doing here? Trying to recapture those feelings?
 (lightly) You might have tried using the Holodeck instead of setting your quarters on fire.
 Have you lost your... faith in Sto-Vo-Kor?
 Inexcusable. (beat) But understandable. You are the only Klingon in Starfleet... and one of the few raised by human parents. Perhaps the problem is that you have only studied the beliefs of your people... only looked at them from the outside.
 It may be that what you seek cannot be found on the Enterprise. You may need to immerse yourself in Klingon beliefs before you can discover whether they hold any truths for you. (beat) Is there anything you could do... any place you could go... to explore your faith more fully?
 Boreth is twelve days from here by shuttle. As of this moment, you are on leave.
 I hope you find what you're looking for, Mister Worf. (beat) Because the next time you set foot on this ship I expect you to carry out your duties like a Starfleet officer.
 Captain's Log: Stardate 46852.2. Our mission to Endora Seven has been cancelled on orders from Starfleet Command. The Enterprise is to proceed directly to the planet Boreth, to take aboard a very unusual guest.
 It would seem that at least Gowron believes it. He personally contacted the Federation Council and asked that a starship be sent to bring Kahless back to the Home World.
 Gowron would only say that there were certain... security concerns which prompted him to make this request. As the nearest starship to Boreth, the task is ours.
 No. All communication with Boreth has been cut-off since yesterday.
 Set course for Boreth, Number One. Warp six.
 Welcome aboard the Enterprise. I'm Captain Jean-Luc Picard.
 (recovering quickly) Thank you.
 I would be happy to arrange a tour of the entire ship for you, once you've settled in. Perhaps Commander Riker could begin by showing you your quarters.
 Worf, what are his plans when he returns to the Home World?
 Perhaps this Kahless is a... stalking horse for someone else... someone who intends to seize control from Gowron.
 We have no reason to rule out anything. We haven't been ordered to discover the origins of our guest, or tell anyone what they should believe... we are simply to transport Kahless to the Home World... and while he's with us, he will be treated as an honored guest.
 Welcome aboard, Gowron.
 I assume you're referring to Kahless.
 Well, the... person in question is in his quarters at the moment.
 We haven't done any analyses.
 If you wanted to run tests on Kahless, you should've sent a Klingon vessel for him.
 If he's really an imposter you shouldn't have anything to worry about.
 ... so Gowron has come aboard in order to test your claim.
 He has brought a knife with him... a knife that was supposed to be stained with the blood of Kahless.
 (to Kahless) Gowron wants to run a genetic analysis on a sample of the blood and on you. It should tell us if there is a... biological match. (beat) If you agree to the test... I will make the Enterprise facilities available to... ensure that it is conducted impartially.
 Gentlemen, please. Let us stick to the issue at--
 Mister Worf?
 Of course.
 Captain's Log, Stardate 46915.2. The Enterprise is orbiting Nervala Four, waiting for an opportunity to retrieve scientific data left there by Starfleet researchers when they were forced to evacuate eight years ago.
 Captain Jean-Luc Picard.
 If you are Wil Riker, if there are two of you... then something extraordinary has occurred. I hope you understand our need to verify your claim.
 Could some sort of cloning be involved?
 But that isn't conclusive.
 Can't brain patterns be cloned?
 How could two men have shared the same childhood experiences? It doesn't make any sense.
 (stopping him) Lieutenant -- my Chief Engineer is checking over the transport logs from the Potemkin. They may shed some light on what happened.
 Don't worry, we'll get to the bottom of this.
 In the meantime you'll be taken to quarters. Make yourself comfortable.
 And another Wil Riker materialized there.
 But over the last eight years, you and...
 (continuing) -- Lieutenant Riker have lived very different lives. You're different people now.
 For us, it's a little like meeting a close friend's twin. You can't help feeling that you know them... but of course you don't.
 No matter how strange it may seem to us... there are now two Wil Rikers aboard this vessel. Getting used to the idea may take a while... especially for you, Wil.
 Lieutenant Riker will be here for a few days at least. We should do everything we can to make him feel comfortable and welcome.
 Can we repair it, at least enough to access the database?
 He was alone down there a long time. I'm hesitant to send him back until he's been evaluated.
 Thank you, Counselor.
 Yes, Number One. Come in.
 Lieutenant Riker came to see me about the away mission.
 He believes the only way to retrieve the database is by directly accessing the main core underneath the station.
 He said he'd been down there quite recently; he seems confident it can be done safely.
 But if that doesn't work, it'll be eight years before we get another chance.
 Given the importance of this data, I think it's worth the risk.
 I'm sure Lieutenant Riker would be happy to help you with that.
 Captain's Log, supplemental. The third transport window has opened and the Away Team is making their final attempt at retrieving the database.
 Captain's Log, Stardate 46920.1. We have retrieved the database from Nervala station and are headed for our rendezvous with the Gandhi.
 Captain's Log, Stardate 46944.2. Commander Data, Mister La Forge, Counselor Troi and I are en route to the Enterprise, after attending a three day conference on the psychological effects of long-term deep space assignments.
 I'll explain it to you later, Data.
 It wasn't any better at the physiognomy workshop. Doctor Vassbinder gave an hour long dissertation on the ionization effect of warp nacelles -- before he realized the topic was supposed to be psychology.
 There was never an opportunity -- never a pause. He just kept talking... like he was speaking in one incredibly long, run-on sentence. (beat) It was almost... hypnotic.
 (to Troi) How long did it appear to you that we were... frozen?
 Let's go through it again. You were sitting there... and we were sitting here... (beat) Describe the exact moment when things appeared to freeze.
 Did you sense anything from us during that time? Any unusual emotions?
 There is another possibility, Counselor. Perhaps this was nothing more than a simple --
 Are you alright?
 It appears to be the same effect you described to us. (beat) Can you remember anything?
 (reacts) What could account for the discrepancy?
 Mister Data -- contact the Enterprise. Tell Commander Riker to get to the rendezvous point as soon as possible. Have him begin scanning the region for temporal anomalies.
 Are we within sensor range yet?
 Increase speed to the rendezvous coordinates.
 Report!
 Full stop. (beat) What happened?
 Is there a containment leak?
 I'll check the fuel consumption logs...
 My hand...
 The pain is going away...
 It happened when I reached for the bowl of fruit.
 (to Data) Check the hull integrity.
 See if you can move us away from the disturbance, Mister La Forge.
 Can we navigate around these... "fragments"?
 Get us to the Enterprise.
 Perhaps they've been delayed...
 Take us to it.
 There she is...
 Mister Data... ?
 Scan for life signs.
 There's a second energy beam. It's coming from the Enterprise deflector array... any idea what it could be?
 We're not going to figure out what happened from here. We need to get aboard the Enterprise.
 Then we've got to find a way to stay unfrozen...
 Mister La Forge... what about a subspace forcefield like the one we used on Devidia Two? Could something like that protect us from the effects of the temporal fragment?
 It would seem that time is one thing we have plenty of...
 (to Geordi) Beam us directly to the Enterprise Bridge.
 Three Romulans... all armed with disruptors... one at Conn... (looks around) There are none of our security officers on the Bridge. They must've taken us by surprise....
 It would appear that we can move objects in this time frame.
 I'm wary about making changes in this time continuum until we understand more about what's going on.
 (off console) Security teams had just been sent to Transporter Room Three... and Sickbay.
 Counselor -- you go to Sickbay. Have a look around. Data, go to Main Engineering -- see if you can determine the cause of the power surge. I'll be in Transporter Room Three. (beat) Picard to La Forge.
 Lock onto our signals. I want you to beam Counselor Troi to --
 Understood. We'll use the Jefferies Tubes. (to others) Let's go.
 T-Sixteen is directly ahead -- it's the main junction for this section of the ship. We should have reasonably easy access to our destinations from there...
 No. We'll find an alternate route. (beat) Let's go back up.
 Excuse me, Mister Worf...
 Counselor. Take a look at this...
 It appears that Mister Worf had just beamed these three aboard... (MORE)
 (off console) According to this, three other Romulans were beamed directly to Sickbay just seconds before.
 Why would we be transporting Romulans onto our ship in the middle of a battle?
 (re: Romulans) They don't have any weapons... and that one looks injured. If they were part of an invasion, why are they unarmed? It doesn't make sense...
 There must be something we can do...
 Picard here.
 What's the problem, Mister Data?
 Expanding... I thought time was suspended on this ship.
 Is there any way we can stop it?
 Astonishing... to see it frozen like this...
 My head... dizzy... I can't...
 No!
 Can we modify the subspace isolators to give us better protection?
 Very well. Our next step is to find out why the Enterprise was transferring power to the Romulan ship. (to Troi) We'll begin our search in their engine room. Counselor -- you spent several days on a Romulan ship -- you know more about their lay-outs than anyone here. Perhaps you can --
 You're right... (to all) I'll monitor your progress from here. Ten minutes... no more.
 When time resumed, did you observe any activity in the engine room that suggested what the Romulans were doing?
 Mister La Forge -- from where you are can you determine what's happening on the Romulan Bridge?
 Mister Data... you said you discovered organic matter within the temporal aperture...
 I want to take a closer look at those readings.
 They appear to contain some sort of energy patterns... (beat) Can you isolate one of them and magnify?
 (off graphic) It looks like a cellular cluster...
 Data. This could be some sort of... embryo...
 (to Romulan) Who are you?
 Who was in danger?
 How did your young become trapped in the core?
 (off that) The Enterprise responded... found the Warbird suffering an apparent engine failure... and attempted a power transfer.
 (realizing) Was it you who attacked the Enterprise?
 Are there others like you here?
 Do you know where he is? Can he help us restore normal time?
 Is there a way to lock onto the core itself... beam it into space?
 Mister Data... when you scanned the temporal aperture with your tricorder... it caused time to move forward, and back again...
 What if we found a way to reverse that process -- make time move backward... then forward.
 ... The breach won't happen.
 Make it so, Data.
 If this works, we may not have much time to prevent the power transfer. We'll have to decide precisely where to be and what to do the instant time begins to move backwards...
 (to com) Acknowledged. Counselor -- are you in position?
 Alright, Mister Data.
 Be ready, Mister Data.
 (quickly) No time to explain, Number One. Continue the evacuation of the Romulan ship. You'll find LaForge in the Romulan engine room -- beam him directly to Sickbay.
 Status, Mister Data?
 (to Riker) Can we move the ship?
 (to Riker) Patch me into the navigational control on the Runabout.
 I'm bringing the Runabout in...
 Mister Data?
 (off console) Data -- it appears that severing the power transfer has not only prevented the core breach, but has also restored space-time to normal.
 The Warbird has vanished as well.
 It's going to take a little time to explain, Number One...
 Captain's Log, Stardate 46945.3. We successfully evacuated the crew of the Romulan ship. We're on course to the Neutral Zone to bring them home.
 RIKER, who is standing at one of the aft science / stations. WORF and TROI are at their stations, an N.D. at Conn. Data ENTERS from the forward Turbolift and moves to Ops. The ship is on Red Alert.
 (puzzled) Ohniaka Three... there's no strategic value to that outpost. Were they able to identify the attackers?
 (to Con) Bring us out of warp, Ensign.
 Hail them, Mister Worf.
 Put them onscreen.
 Or they might simply be another victim. (beat, to Data) What about the outpost on the surface?
 (to Con) Evasive maneuvers, Ensign! (to Tactical) Return fire.
 (to Con) Set an intercept course, Ensign. (to Tactical) Fire torpedoes.
 Very good.
 Mister La Forge?
 Take us back to Ohniaka Three.
 Captain's Log: Stardate 46982.1. Because of his unusual behavior on the planet surface, Commander Data has asked to be temporarily relieved of duty. Unfortunately, this means he will not be able to help us investigate a disturbing new change in the behavior of the Borg.
 (shocked) What?
 Did they show any interest in... assimilating you... or your technology?
 The Borg's entire existence was centered around the acquisition of technology and cultures... if that is no longer the case... then they must have a new objective. We have to find out what it is. (MORE)
 (beat) Mister Worf, from this moment on, we will maintain security condition two. Have armed officers posted on every deck.
 Number One, analyze our sensor readings of the Borg ship... try to determine whether it's something they constructed or an alien ship they captured. Then, run an analysis of this... subspace distortion they used to escape.
 I'm going to contact Starfleet Command.
 Captain's Log: Stardate 46984.6 No additional Borg attacks have been reported in the past two days. However, Starfleet has dispatched Admiral Nechayev to take command in this sector in preparation for a possible Borg invasion.
 Understood.
 I thought I made my reasons clear.
 Once Hugh was separated from the Borg collective he began to... grow and evolve into something more than just an automaton. He was a person. When that happened, I had no choice but to respect his rights as an individual.
 (tight) No one is more aware of the danger than I am. But I am also bound by my oath and my conscience to uphold certain principles. And I will not sacrifice them in order to--
 (tight) Yes, sir.
 (to Data) What's our ETA?
 (to Worf) Contact the Crazy Horse, and the Agamemnon, tell them to stand-by in case we --
 Mister Worf... stand down from Red Alert. Acknowledge the signal from New Berlin, and then transmit another copy of Starfleet's ship recognition protocols... and tell them to read it this time.
 Captain's Log: Supplemental. We have been on patrol for seventeen hours, and there are still no reports of any further Borg activity. But tensions continue to run high on the colonies and outposts in this sector.
 Come.
 (reading) "... an artificially created energy conduit." (tosses PADD on table in irritation) That could be anything.
 I don't want excuses, Number One. I want answers.
 (softer) Sorry.
 He was right here, Wil... in this very room. And I let him go. (beat) Pick any five starship Captains... give them a chance to rid the Federation of a mortal threat. (beat) I would wager that all five would do it... even if it meant sacrificing the rights of one man.
 It may turn out that the moral thing to do... was not the right thing to do.
 Doesn't it seem strange that there have been two Borg attacks... and the Enterprise was the nearest ship in both instances?
 (to Con Officer) Take us out of warp near that ship.
 On screen.
 Lay in an intercept course, full impulse. (to Worf) Lock phasers.
 They're not going to get away this time. (to com) Picard to Engineering. Transfer auxiliary and emergency power to the impulse engines.
 (to com) Picard to Engineering, can you transfer auxiliary power to the warp nacelles? Try to break us out by using the --
 Report.
 On-screen.
 Is everyone else all right?
 (speculating) They beamed aboard as a diversion... to give their ship time to escape.
 Can you wake him?
 Do it.
 (to Security Guard) Lower the forcefield.
 What is your designation?
 Crosis... ? How did you get that name?
 Who is that?
 You are Borg... your goal is not to destroy us... it's to assimilate us into the collective.
 Tell me more about the One... does he have a name? (beat) Is he called Hugh?
 Why does the One wish to destroy biological organisms?
 (hard) I am Locutus of Borg. You will respond to my questions.
 This is going nowhere. Doctor, I want an autopsy performed on the other one. Compare the results to what we learned about Hugh's anatomy... see if there are any recent modifications which could explain the behavioral differences. (to Data) Run a bio-spectral analysis... see if this Borg is trying to send a subspace signal to the others.
 How fast would a ship travel through one of these conduits?
 Is there any way for us to duplicate the --
 Who authorized a launch?
 Picard to shuttlecraft. Identify yourself and return to the ship immediately.
 (to Worf) Lock onto it with a tractor beam and bring it back.
 Mister La Forge, can we follow them into the conduit?
 (to Riker) The question is... is Data a prisoner... or did he go willingly?
 Or perhaps Data's recent flash of... emotion has something to do with this. It may have affected him more profoundly than we realize. Either way, we have to find him.
 Very well. Red Alert, Mister Worf.
 (to Con) Bring us to the shuttle's last known coordinates.
 Mister La Forge?
 (to Con) Take us in, Ensign. One half impulse.
 Report.
 (to Worf) Can you locate the shuttle?
 (grim) The Borg have been busy.
 (to Con) Lay in that course and engage at full impulse.
 Are they intentionally jamming our sensors?
 Can we transport through the interference?
 Agreed. Take a well-armed Away Team and beam down to those coordinates. Have the Transporter Chief maintain a continuous lock on your signals so we can get you out of there at the first sign of trouble.
 (to com) Can you determine how long ago they left the shuttlecraft?
 (to com) Stand-by, Number One. (to Geordi) Assuming they're still together, how far could they have traveled in three hours?
 (beat, then to com) Picard to Riker.
 I'm going to start sending down other Away Teams. Set up a command post and begin mapping out a search plan.
 Picard out.
 (continuing) I want to use shuttlecraft for lowlevel reconnaissance. Have the designated pilots report to the main shuttlebay.
 All available personnel -- including you and me -- will begin assembling four man Away Teams. We'll leave a skeleton crew aboard the ship.
 If the Borg should attack... don't wait for me or anyone else to get back to the ship. Take the Enterprise to the transwarp conduit and return to Federation space.
 Good luck... Captain.
 Who's manning the command post?
 Ready?
 Anything, Mister La Forge?
 Mister La Forge, what if we modified one of our phasers to send out a luvetric pulse? It might cause a resonance fluctuation in Data's power cells...
 Come on.
 Can you tell if it was built by the Borg?
 It's been well maintained... it doesn't look like it's been abandoned.
 (urgent) A dampening field. The whole structure could be shielded from our sensors. Let's go.
 Data... ?
 (surprised, to Troi) What do you mean?
 (shocked) Lore...
 I'm not particularly impressed. You've simply taught them to enjoy killing.
 (realizing) He gave you the chip -- the one Doctor Soong made for you.
 How did he do it, Data? What made you decide to come here?
 You're controlling him. And you've corrupted the Borg.
 I'd like to learn about it. But I want Data to tell us.
 How do you like that, Data? He won't even let you talk.
 Data, do you remember when Hugh was on the Enterprise? Do you remember what you were like then?
 It does to me. I want to know what's happened to Data.
 You must realize that something has happened to you. The Data I know would not be a willing party to Lore's plan.
 Fine. Then what about the things Lore is proposing? What about the lives that have already been lost?
 A carrier wave... is that how he's manipulating Data?
 Can we reactivate it?
 Lore would still be feeding him negative emotions, but at least Data might listen to us.
 Where are you taking him?
 Data, wait -- let us talk to you --
 (continuing) See if the corridor's empty.
 (re: Geordi) What have you done to him?
 I was able to take part of a transceiver from the guard's interlink system. It uses some kind of phased pulse technology. Is there any way we could modify it to generate a kedion pulse and reboot Data's program?
 (finding it) All right, I've found it...
 I've done everything Geordi said. Now to activate it...
 We'll only be able to tell by his behavior.
 I doubt it. It's one program among thousands.
 I just hope this force field has enough energy to trigger the pulse.
 (re: Geordi) You're killing him. He won't survive another session.
 ... It's not too late. If you remove the fibers, Geordi might recover.
 Why? Because Lore says so?
 Good? Aren't good and bad, right and wrong, functions of your ethical program?
 What does that program tell you about what you're doing to Geordi, about what you and Lore are doing to the Borg?
 (continuing) It tells you these things are wrong, doesn't it?
 (continuing) How can actions that are wrong lead to a "greater good"?
 No, Data. You're not confused; you're sensing the truth. Your ethical program is fighting the negative emotions Lore is sending you.
 What about Geordi and Troi?
 It's good to have you back, Data.
 What will you do now?
 I'm not sure that's true.
 Good luck, Hugh.
 Captain's Log, Stardate 47025.4. We have returned to Federation Space and are en route to Starbase two-nine-five. Mister La Forge remains under Doctor Crusher's care.
 Ambassador Loquel... Ambassador Byleth. I'm Captain Picard. Welcome aboard the Enterprise.
 We are honored to be the site of the first cultural exchange between the Iyaaran people and the Federation.
 Pleased to meet you.
 (to Ambassadors) I'm looking forward to meeting with the Premier of Iyar.
 (continuing) There will be a reception in your honor where you'll meet the rest of the Senior Staff. I'll be on my way to your home world, of course -- but I'm leaving you in the hands of my most experienced officers.
 Lieutenant Worf, of the Klingon Empire, is our head of security. He will be responsible for your safety while you're on board.
 Counselor Deanna Troi from the Planet Betazed will be your personal liaison, Ambassador Loquel.
 And my First Officer, Commander William Riker from the planet Earth, will be assigned to you, Ambassador Byleth.
 Commander Riker is a skilled diplomat, with wide experience in inter-species contact --
 Well. That will be -- just fine. Mister Worf... ?
 So... I understand your homeworld has some of the most spectacular crystal formations in the sector.
 (continuing) Is there any place in particular that you recommend I visit while I'm there?
 Yes, well... what's our ETA?
 I think I'll go update my itinerary...
 What happened?
 What's the cause?
 There's an M-Class planet in this system. Can we reach it?
 Inertial dampeners are off-line... life support is failing...
 Voval...
 (continuing) You may have a concussion... try not to move.
 (to com) Picard to Enterprise... (beat) Picard to Enterprise... do you read me?
 I can't get through... too much interference...
 (off tricorder) There's a structure and some energy readings... about two kilometers south of here...
 I'm going to try to find help. Do you understand?
 Try to stay conscious. And don't leave the shuttle... there's some sort of plasma energy on the surface. (beat) I'll be back as soon as I can.
 Is someone there? Who's there... ?
 What do you want? Who are you...
 Who... are you?
 (continuing) Wait. Someone else was with me... the pilot of the shuttlecraft... he's wounded... please, he needs your help...
 Hello...
 (continuing, re: soup) This smells good. Thank you...
 This is a Terellian cargo freighter, isn't it? Is this your ship? Were you one of the crew?
 How many people survived? Are you the only one?
 (continuing) Well, you're certainly not a Terellian... unless you've lost two of your arms...
 (continuing) What's your name? (beat) I'm Jean-Luc Picard. I'm a Starfleet officer.
 Anna... (beat) Anna, is there anyone else on this planet?
 (continuing) How long have you been here?
 Do you remember the date your ship crashed?
 (reacts) That's seven years ago.
 Anna... it's all right...
 Anna, listen to me...
 (continuing) On my shuttle, there's a lot of equipment that survived the crash. We can use it to contact Starfleet. They'll send a ship for us. We can leave.
 Yes. Both of us. If you can get me back to the shuttle...
 Don't worry... I won't move.
 Let them knit... let the bones knit...
 Anna... maybe you could go to the shuttle... bring the equipment back here...
 Good. (beat) Go into the cockpit, and look for a small com panel in the center of the instrument bay. See if you can remove it, and bring it to me.
 What is it?
 Anna... why is the door kept bolted from the outside?
 From what?
 If I can boost the output field, I might be able to send out a distress signal...
 (continuing) There's something wrong with it...
 The entire transmitter module's been destroyed...
 How did this happen? It looks as though it's been hit by a phaser blast.
 No.
 We will get out of here, Anna. But it's not going to be easy... we need to work together...
 Anna... no matter how long it takes, we will get out of here.
 Trying to dislodge this power cell...
 I've almost got it... (works) There.
 (re: cell) Its energy relays are corroded... but it might be able to hold one more charge... (beat) If I can regenerate the cell... we may be able to reactivate the shuttlecraft's engines...
 Sounds delightful...
 Of course.
 If you'll hand me my tricorder, I think I can repair these energy relays.
 Anna. I... care for you a great deal. I am grateful that you saved my life... you are a warm and compassionate person. I have a great deal of sympathy for what you've gone through... alone... here on this planet... (beat) But I don't think you're really in love with me.
 I'm the first person you've seen in seven years. And I've brought you the hope of leaving this place... (beat) Isn't it possible that your feelings are a little... confused right now?
 Look... sometimes when a person has gone through a traumatic experience, like yours... they come to look upon the person who rescues them as a sort of... larger than life figure. Sometimes they become infatuated with their rescuer. They may even think that... they're in love with that person...
 That's not true. You're a very lovely woman. I just think this is... a little premature. We don't know anything about each other.
 It's all right.
 It'll take a couple of hours for the power cell to charge. After that, we'll have to take it to the shuttle immediately. The cell casing is already breaking down...
 We're going to get out of here, Anna.
 The power cell's ready. We need to get to the shuttle...
 Why not?
 We don't have a few hours. I told you, the cell's already degrading...
 I'm feeling much better now. And I don't intend to use this any longer...
 (firm) Anna.
 There's no pain. It would seem that my ribs weren't broken after all...
 (hard) What the hell's going on? Why are you trying to keep me here?
 Why do you keep me locked inside this freighter? You say there are dangerous animals... but I've yet to see or hear a single one of them...
 And what about that com panel? You said you damaged it while cutting it out of the shuttle... Did you? I find it hard to believe you would be that clumsy with the one piece of equipment that could save you after seven years.
 (re: device) And what was this really for... to keep me immobilized?
 So you found it necessary to hold me captive?
 I'm going to go find that shuttle myself...
 Anna...
 Anna, no.
 Stop it!
 Anna, wait... where are you going?
 Anna!
 the voice.
 Over here! There's a door on the opposite side!
 (continuing) Over here! The door's over here!
 Voval...
 (continuing) I thought you were dead...
 Yes. There's a woman who lives here... she went to the shuttle... she told me you were dead...
 I see...
 Yes...
 She was upset.
 It's possible...
 All right. You stay here -- warm yourself. I'll go look for her...
 Anna!
 Anna...
 You don't have to do this. I found Voval, the shuttle pilot -- he's still alive. He can help us get away...
 Anna --
 No... no, I won't promise that. You've been manipulating me, haven't you?
 Your necklace. I broke it. It was lying in the cargo freighter, by the fire... I left it there. (beat) Now it's whole again and back on your neck. How?
 Where's Voval? Isn't it convenient that he arrived at the freighter only moments after you left... and then he insisted that I come looking for you. He took me here to the ledge... where I found you... on the cliff, about to jump. Very well-timed, wouldn't you say?
 Are you working together? Voval's the only one who could've gotten the necklace and given it to you...
 Go ahead.
 (continuing) What are you waiting for? It's a long fall... at least two hundred meters. You should die instantly... if that's what you really want.
 (continuing) But somehow, I don't think it is.
 Failed. Voval... what was the purpose of all this?
 Ambassador...
 You staged the crash... faked my injury... and arranged all this to see if I would fall in love with you?
 What gave you the idea that trapping me here would give you the opportunity to explore love?
 (realizing) And that man was injured... the woman nursed him back to health... they fell in love...
 Well... let's just say that we're not used to such a... direct approach. (beat) Ambassador Voval... I must tell you that in our culture, what you've done would be considered dangerously close to a crime.
 We can... talk about that later.
 (continuing) The first order of business would seem to be getting off this planet. Am I to assume the shuttle is not as badly damaged as it looked?
 Then let's go...
 For me as well, Ambassador.
 On the contrary. I found your approach... intriguing. (off his look) We humans tend to take a rather... balanced approach to life. Never too much, never too little. It's nice to find a culture that's willing to take an experience to its furthest extremes.
 Captain's Log, Stardate 47215.5. We are responding to a distress call from the science vessel Raman, which is apparently trapped inside the turbulent atmosphere of an unusual gas giant planet. We will use an experimental interface probe in our attempt to rescue it.
 science station where Riker, Data and Geordi are working.
 Any life signs?
 Will the probe be able to transmit through the interference?
 Will your nervous system be able to handle that much sensory input?
 In my Ready Room.
 (continuing) The seven people on that ship are our first priority. Is the probe ready for launch?
 Send it directly to the aft section of the Raman, through the secondary air lock. That'll put it one bulkhead away from the Bridge.
 Make it so.
 Onscreen.
 (continuing) Hello, Marcus.
 How's life on DS-Three?
 Nothing unusual about that.
 The Hera?
 I'll tell Commander La Forge...
 Mister Data, I need a word with Commander La Forge.
 I've just spoken to Starfleet. (gently) The Hera is missing.
 Captain La Forge has disappeared along with the rest of her crew...
 Picard to Commander Data. Report.
 Proceed.
 How did this happen?
 Shouldn't the safety over-rides have prevented that?
 The Raman's crew is dead. I'd like to retrieve their vessel, but not if it means risking Geordi's safety.
 Doctor?
 Alright. (touches combadge) Picard to Riker.
 The Raman's crew is dead. I'd like to retrieve their vessel, but not if it means risking Geordi's safety.
 Doctor?
 Alright. (touches combadge) Picard to Riker.
 I've decided to proceed with the probe.
 How long before you can get it into position?
 Acknowledged.
 Is there any indication of what caused the hallucination?
 Then you believe you saw some kind of... transmission?
 Granted. But why would he perceive his mother visually, as if she were standing in the room?
 (gently) The Hera's last reported location was over three hundred light years away. How could it have ended up here?
 I'm sorry, Geordi. But I won't risk your life.
 Mister Data, find another way to salvage the Raman. I want to hear an alternate plan in two hours.
 (gently) In the meantime, I'd like you to talk with Counselor Troi. She's expecting you.
 Can we get those shuttles close enough without putting them in danger? (to Geordi) Mister La Forge.
 In that case --
 Commander --
 Why here?
 Do you have any evidence to support this... hypothesis?
 Is any of this possible?
 How unlikely?
 Proceed with the shuttle plan.
 -- Mister La Forge. Stay here for a moment.
 (continuing) Geordi, I'm not unsympathetic about what you're going through. But I want you to consider my position as well.
 Your mother's disappearance... It's... a tragic thing... (beat) But I can't risk your safety on the basis of a dubious hypothesis.
 I'm sorry, Geordi. I've made my decision.
 La Forge.
 Stop your descent and prepare to disengage the interface.
 Damn it, Geordi -- you're going to kill yourself...
 Geordi -- what's happening to you?
 Geordi!
 Geordi... Report.
 Is there any way we can disconnect him?
 How can we lower the input gradually and still get him out before it's too late?
 Deceive them?
 Like a decompression tank. (off their nods) Let's try it.
 Explain.
 How do you know all this?
 Were these beings responsible for the death of the Raman's crew?
 La Forge! What happened?
 Are you ready to switch inputs?
 Is it working?
 Captain's Log, supplemental. We have succeeded in disengaging Mister La Forge from the interface and are en route to Starbase four-nine-five.
 You disobeyed my direct order, and you put yourself in grave danger. (beat) I'm not happy.
 (interrupting) I'll deal with Data at another time. Meanwhile, I'll have to write this incident into your permanent record.
 Geordi...
 (continuing) I'm very sorry you didn't find your mother.
 They're right, Baran, and you know it...
 (continuing) I say kill him. Now.
 (re: Riker) If he has nothing to give us, then we should kill him now and be done with it. Everyone seems to recognize that fact except you.
 He may not be as useful as you think...
 (continuing) ... if this is the same Riker I've heard about.
 Commander of the Enterprise... ? Formerly assigned to the USS Hood... ?
 Then you must be the William T. Riker with a history of insubordination...
 (continuing) He was even relieved of duty once, during the Cardassian incident at Minos Korva.
 I've been smuggling artifacts out of Federation sites for years. It's difficult to avoid developing a... familiarity with certain Starfleet personnel...
 (taunting) If we hadn't captured him, he probably would've ended up in front of a court martial.
 (to Baran) He's no use to us. Finish him now or let me do it for you.
 It's the antimatter flow regulator... It's locked open...
 The flow regulator is frozen...
 We don't have much time...
 (continuing) I hardly expected to see you here, Wil.
 These mercenaries use weapons which activate their Transporter. It allows them to beam away objects quickly, by simply firing at them. That's what they did to me.
 One of the sites I wanted to study had been raided. A lot of artifacts were stolen... the site was practically destroyed. I wanted to find who was responsible. (beat) I tracked them to the bar on Dessica Two. I suppose I asked too many questions... They captured me to find out how much I knew about their operation...
 I convinced them I was a smuggler named "Galen", and I offered to help them appraise the relics they'd stolen...
 (continuing) Wil, these aren't common thieves. They're stealing Romulan artifacts from archaeological sites throughout this sector... (beat) Baran has me analyzing each one for a particular particle signature. They're looking for a specific artifact...
 That's what we have to find out. And Baran is the key. I believe he's the only one on board who really knows what we're looking for. (beat) I want you to try to get close to Baran... gain his confidence.
 (nods) He also believes you're a less than perfect Starfleet officer... you'll have to play into that role. (MORE)
 (beat) Baran doesn't care much for me -- he tolerates me because he needs me to test the artifacts. If you and I become enemies, there's a better chance you can become his friend.
 Getting some answers. Just because you couldn't get him to talk --
 Calder Two isn't just another archaeological site. There's a Federation outpost there.
 It's defended by Starfleet. They're not going to just stand by while we walk in and take whatever we want.
 They'll also have a minimum of two phaser banks... and possibly even photon torpedoes. Is that enough to worry about?
 I tried to smuggle a Sakethan glyph stone out of there two years ago. I barely got away in one piece.
 Fifteen minutes is more than enough time to transmit a distress call.
 He's right. And our landing party would be stranded on the surface.
 That's because you won't be down there... your life won't be at risk.
 Why? Who are we working for?
 Maybe we do. (beat) Why don't we use Riker?
 A Starfleet Commander might be able to talk us past the outpost security without raising any suspicions. (beat) Once they drop their shields, we could beam the artifacts up without having to leave the ship.
 If he doesn't help us, we'll destroy the outpost and kill everyone on it. He's still a Starfleet officer... he won't let innocent people die if he can prevent it.
 Computer. Access spectral enhancement mode three and begin scan.
 Analysis?
 Computer. Reset diagnostic for new sample, lot number three-six-nine-A...
 Tell Baran if he wants the analysis done faster, he can do it himself. If he wants it done correctly, he can wait.
 I doubt he'll do that. I've increased the accuracy of the identification process by a factor of ten. I'm the best person here to analyze these artifacts, and Baran knows it.
 Computer, begin scan.
 I don't like operating in the dark. If I knew what the point of this mission were... why I'm scanning these relics...
 Do you know what this is all about?
 Then tell me what we're doing here. Why are we risking our lives taking these artifacts? Who wants them?
 You can tell him every word I've said. He knows I don't think he's much of a leader.
 He wouldn't be captain for five minutes if he didn't have the control device. (MORE)
 The crew follows him because they have no choice. Baran's power is based only on fear and intimidation.
 If someone were to challenge Baran -- the crew would follow.
 That would take too long. Starfleet might be here any minute...
 I'm configuring the disruptors to fire a phase-resonant pulse... If I can hit their shield generator at precisely the right frequency, I should be able to knock it off-line with a single shot... (beat) Firing...
 (off console) Their shields are down...
 They've managed to get their shields back up.
 (off console) We've lost three plasma relays on the disruptors. Auxiliary power... is not available.
 What's wrong, Commander? Starting to have second thoughts about betraying your comrades... because that's what you've done -- betrayed them... betrayed them in order to save yourself. (beat) You were just a second-rate officer before... now you're a coward and a traitor. How does that feel?
 (irritated) Tell Baran I'm working as fast as I can.
 (continuing) What?
 You were there. The disruptors lost power. (to computer) Computer, reset diagnostic for new sample and begin scan.
 (sarcastic) I'm touched by your concern for my well-being.
 Computer, reset diagnostic and begin scan. (to Tallera) I'm not a prisoner in a Romulan labor camp, Tallera. I don't have to answer your questions and I don't give a damn what you think.
 Well, whatever it is... it looks like we've found it.
 I've had a few... unpleasant surprises. (puts the phaser away) This isn't a good idea, Wil. Baran may get suspicious.
 Wheels within wheels... I'm starting to forget which side I'm on. (beat) All right... what have you found out so far?
 (puzzled) A second artifact... ? (beat) By the way, these artifacts aren't Romulan... they're Vulcan.
 I've been looking over the glyphs and pictograms I found on the Calder Two artifact. There's not enough data to translate the inscription, but the alphabet and symbology are more consistent with early Vulcan artifacts than Romulan.
 I don't know. (frustrated) If I could just get access to the Enterprise computer for even a few moments...
 What will Baran do once we obtain the second artifact?
 (dry) You always seem to be after my job.
 Once Baran decides I've outlived my usefulness... he can simply kill me with the neural servo. (beat) I think... we'd better start planning a mutiny.
 We need a new captain... so I've come to one inescapable conclusion...
 Oh?
 And who do you think they'll follow... you?
 What?
 I don't know what you're talking about.
 (shocked) Vulcan Security?
 What sort of threat?
 (continuing) I'm Captain Jean-Luc Picard of the Enterprise.
 It sounds like a very... illogical philosophy.
 What are these artifacts we're collecting? I know they're Vulcan in origin...
 You were much like my people once were... a warlike, savage race...
 The Stone of Gol... ?
 I know the story from Vulcan mythology. According to the legend whoever possessed the stone needed only to think of throwing it at someone... and that person would be killed.
 As I recall the legend, the Stone of Gol was destroyed by the gods when the Vulcan people found the way to peace...
 A telepathic weapon...
 Since Baran will presumably need to deliver the artifacts to this assassin in order to get paid, it would seem that the best course of action is to continue with our little masquerade for now.
 How could they have found out about the rendezvous, Commander?
 Or maybe you're a clever liar.
 How can you be sure Koral had the piece when he was captured?
 You have a very bad sense of humor, Baran.
 Do you have any idea how many security officers they have on a ship like that?
 (sarcastic) Oh, how convenient... we'll just beam you aboard your old ship and then hope that you won't change your mind and decide to betray us?
 Agreed.
 Don't.
 (closes tricorder) It's not in here. (to Worf) Where's the artifact?
 This is it.
 Yes, I recognize the inscription pattern from the first artifact.
 Is he dead?
 Good. (to Narik) Activate the transporter. (to Data) Good-bye.
 Oh, I do have something else for you...
 Tell them what happened, Narik.
 He might have killed all of us. And I believe he was acting on the direct orders of Baran. (looks at Baran) You betrayed us.
 (continuing) I say this has gone on long enough. It's time for a new commander... someone who will lead us to the profits we've been promised.
 A refusal to follow your orders... the orders of a small man trying to fill a role too big for him.
 (to all) More promises of riches. More excuses for Baran to fill his own coffers while the rest of us go begging. I say it's time for a change. Who's with me?
 (quiet) It's over, Baran.
 You can't kill us all... you need us to run the ship more than we need you to command it.
 I switched our transponder codes. It seemed like a prudent, if regrettable step.
 There'll be no more "punishment" on this ship. Do your duties and I'll see to it that we complete our mission... and get our payment.
 Maintain course and speed for now. I'm going to find out where and when we're supposed to deliver our cargo.
 (off monitor) According to Baran's logs, the two artifacts are supposed to be delivered... to the T'Karath Sanctuary on Vulcan.
 (to com) Galen to Bridge. Alter course for Vulcan.
 (to Tallera) Perhaps you can help me with something... I've been able to translate most of the writing on these pieces...
 For the most part, they're just warnings of death and destruction for those who oppose the resonator...
 But this hieroglyph on the anterior has me a bit puzzled.
 This is clearly the Vulcan god of war... and this is the god of death...
 But if you look closely you can see that there is a third symbol missing -- which should be on the final piece. The odd thing is that typically, the gods of war and death would stand alone on an artifact... they would never be combined with a third glyph.
 Hmmmm. I'm anxious to see the final artifact... it may provide a new insight into Vulcan mythology.
 (nods agreement) We shouldn't have any problems entering orbit. (MORE)
 I told Commander Riker to contact the Vulcan authorities from the Enterprise and warn them of our approach.
 (off her reaction) I didn't want to risk a misunderstanding... someone might have mistaken this for an actual raid...
 Perhaps I should contact the Enterprise... have them meet us at Vulcan in case these isolationists try to escape.
 I see. (beat) Are you sure it's wise for you to go to the Sanctuary alone? After all, they're expecting Baran to show up, not you. If I accompanied you, it may seem more plausible that --
 Of course.
 Tallera... I've decided on a change of plan. Leave one artifact here for now. Take the other... and once we have our payment in hand, we'll complete the delivery.
 I realize that. But it would be safer for all concerned if we kept one piece here.
 They've waited a long time for this. They won't take any risks at this stage. Take the piece and beam down.
 Tallera's right, I am a Starfleet officer... but what she's not telling you is that those artifacts in her hand are part of an incredibly powerful weapon. There's no reward waiting for you down on the surface. Tallera will take the artifacts and leave you here, to be captured by Starfleet.
 (to others) You know Tallera... you know she's a woman of great patience. She's bided her time and waited for this moment. All she cares about is assembling that weapon. If she leaves this ship you'll never see her again.
 You can't win, Tallera. Starfleet won't stand by while you tear apart one of the founding worlds of the Federation.
 Drop your weapons! Do it!
 (continuing) Make no aggressive movements. The resonator amplifys violent thoughts and emotions.
 (to Tallera) That's why you wanted me to take the phaser -- and why you were able to kill Narik and Vekor. It wasn't until I saw the image on the last artifact... that I realized what the message on the resonator was. (beat) The third image is the Vulcan symbol for peace... that symbol is positioned between the symbols for war and death. (MORE)
 It's a warning... that the resonator's power can be overcome by peace.
 (to officers) Clear your minds of all aggressive thoughts...
 Think, Tallera -- two thousand years ago, your people were being consumed by war... then they found the way of peace and logic. During the same period, the resonator was dismantled... don't you see the connection? (beat) When peace came to Vulcan, the resonator became useless. That is why it was dismantled.
 (quiet) You were right... the resonator cannot be stopped with phasers or shields. But like every other form of violence... it can be stopped with peace.
 Captain's Log: Stardate 47169.2. Security Minister Satok has taken Tallera into custody and begun a search for the rest of the isolationists.
 Satok assured me that all three pieces will be destroyed.
 Normally, I would be the first to agree with you... but perhaps there are some things best left in the past.
 They have been detained by the Vulcan authorities, for the moment. (MORE)
 But they're also facing charges from the Klingons, the Cardassians, the Ferengi, and about seven other worlds. We won't be hearing from them for quite some time.
 Number One, set course for Starbase two-twenty-seven. I'll be on the Bridge shortly.
 (to Data) Quite right. I'm going to get some sleep. In the meantime I suggest you escort Commander Riker to the brig.
 Captain's Log, Stardate 47225.7. Commander La Forge has completed the installation of our new warp core. We are preparing to test its capabilities.
 I just got a message from Starfleet command.
 You could say that...
 (continuing) I've been invited to the annual Starfleet Admiral's banquet.
 I've managed to avoid it for the last six years. I guess my luck just ran out... (MORE)
 (beat) I can't imagine anything more tedious. Fifty Admirals shaking hands, making dull conversation... uninteresting food... boring speeches...
 After six years, I don't have any excuses left. Besides, I've been invited by Admiral Nakamura, the Sector Commander. He'd consider it an insult if I turned him down.
 (wry) I wouldn't count on it.
 Bridge to Commander La Forge. What's our status?
 Acknowledged. (then) Ensign Russell, plot a course to Starbase Two-nineteen. Warp six.
 (continuing) Engage.
 (continuing, a little louder) Engage...
 (continuing, to com) Bridge to Engineering. Mister La Forge... why isn't my ship moving?
 Very well. Ensign Russell?
 Mister La Forge?
 On screen.
 Admiral.
 Actually, we've been experiencing a few minor difficulties with our new warp core. But my Chief Engineer assures me that we'll be under way within the hour.
 My apologies, Admiral.
 Oh, no... certainly not, sir. I'm looking forward to it.
 (to com) Go ahead, Geordi.
 Ensign Russell -- set course and engage.
 Engineering -- report!
 Mister Worf, open a channel to Starbase Two-nineteen. Advise Admiral Nakamura... I'll be later than I thought.
 Admiral, I can explain...
 Unfortunately, the problem has affected our impulse systems now. At the moment, we are... adrift.
 That won't be necessary. I have full confidence in my Engineering staff. I will be at the banquet on time.
 Yes, I know... it sounds... delightful.
 Yes, sir. Picard out.
 That won't be necessary. I have full confidence in my Engineering staff. I will be at the banquet on time.
 Yes, I know... it sounds... delightful.
 Yes, sir. Picard out.
 Have you tried reconfiguring the plasma conduit?
 What about the relays? Have you made absolutely sure they don't need a new phase invertor?
 I see...
 Perhaps I can help you reconfigure these isolinear chips...
 You're right... (beat) If you don't mind, I'll just wait here and observe your progress.
 Not at all. I'd be happy to...
 And what you saw was some sort of a... "mouth" on Counselor Troi's shoulder...
 A straw?
 Mister La Forge?
 Make it so. (to Data) In the meantime, Mister Data... I'm going to have to relieve you of duty and confine you to quarters.
 What is it?
 Can we reverse the process?
 Can we affect the organisms in any way?
 Perhaps Starbase Eighty-four... could we have picked them up there during the installation of the warp core?
 What about Mister Data? There must be some connection between his odd behavior and these creatures. Is he infested, as well?
 Data attacked Counselor Troi because he said he saw a... "mouth" on her shoulder... (to Beverly) And in that same area, you first discovered one of the organisms...
 I think it's time we took a closer look at Mister Data's dreams.
 Perhaps we can learn more about the creatures by interpreting the symbols and images in your dreams.
 Exactly. (to Geordi) How soon can you have the link ready?
 Make it so. (beat) In the meantime, Mister Data... I'd say you should prepare for bed.
 Ready, Mister Data?
 (to Data) Normally, I would wish you pleasant dreams... but in this case, bad dreams would be more helpful.
 Keep your eyes peeled. Even an apparently insignificant image could be an important symbol.
 Can we talk to Data directly... or will that wake him up?
 That sounds like a telephone ringer... (looks around) I don't see a receiver...
 Thank you.
 (continuing) Look at that... her right shoulder... the same place he stabbed her...
 (thinking) They're both symbols of... consumption. Food... a mouth... (to Data) Mister Data, what kind of cake is this?
 (to Geordi) What could the ringing symbolize? Sound... a bell... an old way of communicating...
 (into phone) Picard.
 Kill who?
 Who is this?
 You mean, the interphasic organisms...
 Tell me, Doctor... how can we kill them?
 (re: workmen) What do they represent?
 (re: ringing) "Respond"... respond to them... what does that mean?
 (to workmen) Who are you?
 (quickly, to Data) Data, the shrieking noise you made -- it causes them pain!
 Data, what's going on?
 What about the shrieking noise you made?
 When you made those sounds, the workmen reacted in pain...
 (taps communicator) Picard to Sickbay. Beverly, we're going to be sweeping the ship with a high-frequency IP pulse. Monitor the creatures for any response.
 Captain's Log, supplemental The creatures infesting the Enterprise have been completely eliminated. We believe the infestation originated within the warp core we obtained on Starbase Eighty-four.
 How long until we have warp power again?
 The banquet is in eight hours... (beat) Take your time. Give yourself another twelve hours, if you need it.
 Captain's Log, Stardate 47254.1. A delegation of the Cairn have just come on board. This telepathic species has no concept of spoken language, and is being instructed in its use by... an old friend.
 It must have been.
 I can imagine...
 Really?
 I'd be happy to.
 Is there any physiological cause?
 Yet her neural activity is practically non-existent.
 Might there be some side-effect of Cairn telepathy that we're not aware of?
 (to Troi) I think you and I had better have a talk with Maques.
 Maques, is it possible that your telepathic communications with Mrs. Troi harmed her in some way?
 Counsellor --
 (continuing, to Maques) Stop it!
 Is Maques suggesting that Lwaxana's meta-conscious is damaged somehow?
 What were you doing in Sickbay, Maques?
 Was he trying to contact her telepathically?
 If you succeed, would you be able to use that information to help your Mother?
 If her psyche has... "collapsed in on itself," could accessing her mind pose any danger to you?
 Counselor... can you hear me... ?
 Deanna... Doctor Crusher is concerned that your para-cortical readings have become erratic.
 Yes. I want you to sever your connection to your Mother.
 I'm asking you.
 (continuing) That's an order, Counselor.
 Leave me alone... please...
 Could this event have involved Hedril?
 A part that she's protecting... (explaining) ... you said everything you encountered when you were in her mind was a barrier of one kind or another...
 (a greeting) Counselor...
 I've just been in Sickbay. Doctor Crusher feels your mother's condition is deteriorating... her neural functions are getting weaker.
 Have you had any luck here?
 Is this your Father?
 He had a kind face...
 Deanna... your Mother might still come out of this.
 You said you'd reviewed her journals for the past five years. Perhaps we should go further back.
 Well, let's start at the beginning.
 The first entry seems to be Stardate 30620.1.
 This is odd... there's a seven year gap.
 And if I'm not mistaken, it ends a few months after your birth.
 She didn't. The files were deleted.
 (continuing) By your Mother... almost thirty years ago.
 Captain's Log: Stardate 47304.2. The Enterprise has arrived at Kesprytt Three in order to evaluate an unusual request on the part of the Kes for associate membership in the Federation.
 up the last remnants of a large breakfast. The fare this morning consists of some strange-looking soup with the consistency of molasses and plates of exotic fruits. Beverly eats heartily, thoroughly enjoying every bite -- Picard is somewhat restrained... making vague motions at the soup and mostly contenting himself with a cup of tea and a biscuit.
 Mmmmm.
 Yes?
 What would you like me to say? I'm very pleased for them both.
 The two... people we were discussing.
 (laughing) No... no, I'm sorry... but I really don't.
 Oh, now it hasn't been that long.
 You're right. I'm sorry.
 Not worried exactly... just uneasy. This notion of admitting half of their planet to the Federation while leaving the other half out...
 Every member of the Federation has entered as a unified world... and that unity said something about them... that they had resolved certain social and political problems at home and were ready to join a larger community.
 But the Prytt are not. They are reclusive to the point of xenophobia.
 That analogy is not entirely --
 (to com) Go ahead, Number One.
 Inform him we're on our way.
 Thank you for breakfast.
 Let's not keep them waiting, Mister Worf.
 Energize.
 Beverly... Beverly...
 I don't know.
 I would assume that we're on Kesprytt... in some kind of prison cell.
 (continuing) The question is why? I can't imagine that Ambassador Mauric would --
 What is it?
 Some kind of coercive device... ?
 Why are we being held?
 Prisoners. By whose authority?
 The enemy... you mean the Kes.
 Your information is in error. There are no plans to enter into any --
 And you will discover that we're telling the truth.
 What?
 You're staring at me.
 (returns to the wall) As long as it takes. With any luck, there may be a structural flaw that would allow us to escape.
 The important thing during any confinement is to think positively and not to give up hope... there is a way out of every box... there is a solution to every puzzle... it is simply a matter of --
 Damn.
 (grim) What it means is that they plan on keeping us here for a while...
 Does it work?
 It's a map...
 Possibly.
 It could be part of a very carefully laid trap.
 Agreed. Is there a way to open the cell door?
 (re: cave door) Someone obviously put a lot of time and effort into this.
 You're assuming he's a Kes agent.
 There must be a lava flow or a hot spring somewhere near by.
 Can we get through it?
 What did you say?
 Say when...
 The eruptions have stopped...
 There's no way out of here...
 (puzzled) What?
 I didn't say anything about being thirsty.
 I was thinking about it, but I didn't say anything.
 (touches implant) The transceivers. Lorin said they would align themselves to our psi wave patterns...
 I don't know.
 (nods) For now, I'm afraid we have more immediate concerns. Does the map indicate a way out of here?
 Right.
 (continuing) I heard that. (off her look) They weren't words exactly... I suddenly had this... sense of fear... a fear of heights.
 What a strange sensation... your thoughts just appeared in my mind.
 Come on. We've done this before... it's just like on the Holodeck. (takes her hand and puts it on rock) One hand-hold at a time... nothing too fast... just a slow, gentle climb.
 One of us is hungry.
 Try to think of something else. You're making me hungry.
 Something other than a large bowl of vegetable soup.
 Beverly.
 (having "heard" her) I am not being unreasonable.
 You're right. We can't react to every random thought that crosses the other person's mind. (beat) It's astonishing how much... clutter there is in our consciousness. Odd memories coming to the surface... bits of half-remembered songs...
 (lightly) I just wanted to see if you were listening.
 (nods) Maybe we should put some distance between us... that might weaken it. (wry) Not that I'm tired of hearing your most intimate thoughts...
 What happened?
 Me too.
 The same thing... but when you moved back toward me... I felt better.
 It would seem we're stuck with each other.
 What's wrong?
 Let me see.
 (continuing, confidently) This way.
 What?
 No. (MORE)
 (beat) But... there are times when it's important for a Captain to give the appearance of confidence.
 I'm beginning to realize that you seem to always have some... acerbic remark on the tip of your tongue.
 (reading her thoughts) Your friends... and someone named Tom Norris... ?
 (overlapping) "Or is your face dirty?"
 There's something more... you're laughing, but... (surprised) You actually feel... embarrassed about that incident.
 (shakes his head) This... sharing of thoughts and feelings... it's compelling in a strange way...
 No. We'd have to backtrack several kilometers to find another way over this ridge.
 (off tricorder) The border's only two kilometers east of here... there's a forcefield protecting it, but we'll have to find a way to deal with that when we get there.
 No luck.
 Well... if we're lucky, we'll be back on the Enterprise by this time tomorrow and you can plant yourself in front of a replicator with a knife and fork.
 That's not true.
 That's not quite what I meant...
 I simply... don't like...
 No, no. It's... just that I feel breakfast should be... a simple meal... and recently they seem to have become more elaborate.
 It didn't seem that important...
 (continuing) You don't like those elaborate meals either.
 (continuing) I love firelight.
 There's something about the flame... the smell of the smoke... I've always felt it's intoxicating in a way...
 Beverly, please. I don't want to talk about this right now.
 Didn't you?
 You were married to my best friend. (beat) At first, it seemed like a harmless infatuation... something more hormonal than emotional. But then...
 I began to realize that it was something more. (beat) It wasn't right... and I knew I wouldn't act on it... but I couldn't help the way I felt.
 I felt guilty before he died... having those kind of feelings for my best friend's wife. Then... later, after the accident... I told myself that no matter what happened I would never let you know how I felt.
 Betraying my friend...
 I didn't know how I would react. (beat) But gradually, I found that I didn't feel that way anymore... that twenty years was indeed a long time...
 Yes... friends.
 Right.
 I'm all right.
 No, no. The modulation frequency should be in the upper-harmonic range.
 I tend to agree, Number One.
 (to Beverly) I know... I know... you're absolutely right.
 My pleasure.
 Were you getting tired of my company?
 Our... freedom.
 I was just thinking... that as distracting as it was... I was beginning to get used to... "hearing" your thoughts.
 Oh?
 A man can't be held responsible for what his mind does when he's asleep.
 So now that we've had this... unique experience... what do we do now?
 You know exactly what I mean.
 I mean now that we know how we each feel... perhaps we shouldn't be afraid to explore those feelings...
 Good-night.
 Captain's Log, Stardate 47310.2. We are investigating the disappearance of the Medical Transport Fleming somewhere in the Hekaras Corridor. Our search is complicated by the unique properties of this particular region of space.
 are seated at the conference table. The mood is upbeat -- even though the mission is serious, it's still fairly routine.
 How long will it take to complete a level-one search?
 Agreed.
 (continuing) All right then. Mister Worf, initiate your search pattern. Let's head in.
 On screen.
 What about life signs?
 Mister Worf, open a hailing frequency.
 Make it so.
 Mister Worf, have tractor beams standing by... we may have to take them under tow... (beat) Helm, bring us within tractor range...
 (quickly) Raise shields --
 Target their weapons array only.
 Fire.
 (to Worf) Damage report.
 But why attack us in the first place?
 Mister La Forge, how are you coming with that com link?
 Open a channel.
 This is Captain Jean-Luc Picard of the Enterprise. Please explain your attack on my ship.
 Your ship was adrift and your communications inoperative. We were attempting to ascertain your status.
 Daimon, there has clearly been a misunderstanding here. I believe it would be in everyone's best interests if you came aboard and we discussed the situation.
 Then I suppose we'll be on our way... (beat) If you wish, I'll relay your position to your government... in case you're unable to complete repairs... and remain stranded here.
 Daimon Prak. The Federation established this Corridor to ensure a safe route through the sector. We have nothing to gain from mining it.
 Perhaps if we assigned an engineering team to assist with the repair efforts... would that give you time to retrieve your logs?
 Captain's Log, Stardate, 47311.4. Based on the Ferengi sensor logs, we have traced the Fleming's most likely course. It now appears that the vessel may have come to an unfortunate end.
 What's the origin of this debris field?
 Could it be what's left of the Fleming?
 All right... let's take a closer look. Perhaps we can find something to give us a positive identification.
 (continuing) Helm, plot a course through the debris field. Ahead slow.
 Shields up! Full reverse, now!
 (continuing, to Worf) Damage report.
 On screen.
 (to Worf) Can you get any power to the shields?
 (hard, to Rabal) You've made a very serious accusation. I want you to explain it.
 Doctor, if you wanted us to review your research, you could have placed a request through the Science Council.
 (continuing) Mister La Forge, how long do you estimate it will take to restore the engines?
 Because of the seriousness of your claims, I'm willing to listen to your case. But make no mistake. Our priority here is the recovery of the Fleming. (beat) I expect you to help us restore our systems and deactivate all your remaining probes in the Corridor... (beat) If you do not, I will put you both in the brig and take you to the nearest Starbase where you'll face charges for what you've done.
 We will, Doctor. Part of our job is to maintain an open mind... even under these circumstances. (beat) Mister La Forge, take them to Engineering and get the core back on-line.
 Mister Data, begin a review of their research. I'd like your report as soon as possible.
 I see. It's like pacing up and down on a carpet... eventually, you wear a hole in it.
 Can their theory be proven?
 (taps combadge) Go ahead.
 What's their condition?
 All right. We'll get underway as soon as the engines are back on-line.
 I'd like you all to put together a research proposal for the Science Council. I'll give it my full recommendation.
 Very good.
 (to conn) Helm, lay in a course for the Fleming.
 What's going on, Doctor?
 (nods) Mister Worf, open a channel.
 Report!
 (to Data) Mister Data, what's your analysis?
 (to Data) Can you get a fix on the Fleming? Is it still in one piece?
 Doctor, is it possible for a ship to survive in there?
 Doctor...
 (continuing) I'm sorry about your loss... but we need your help now.
 Does the rift pose any danger to the Fleming?
 What about the Fleming? How long can they survive in there?
 Then I want some better options. (beat) Data, Geordi... take Doctor Rabal and begin an analysis of the rift. We need a way to get the Fleming out of there.
 Mister Data, begin your calculations. We'll go in as soon as you're ready.
 (to com) Mister La Forge... whenever you're ready...
 How long until we reach the Fleming?
 I know, Data. (to Worf) Can we establish communications?
 How long until we reach transporter range?
 Report!
 (catching on) A distortion wave...
 (to Worf) Is everyone off the Fleming?
 All right, Mister La Forge. Get us out of here.
 (to Data) Engage shield emitters... full power...
 (to com) What went wrong, Mister La Forge?
 Helm, full impulse. Head us out of the rift. (beat; to com)) Shield emitters, stand-by.
 Engage emitters... now.
 (to Data) How much longer until we clear the rift?
 Cancel red alert.
 Captain's Log, Stardate 47314.5. We have been continuing our research, while the Federation Council studies our reports on the subspace rift. (MORE)
 It now appears certain that what we've seen here will have repercussions for many years to come.
 (to Geordi and Rabal) Thank you, gentlemen.
 (to group) We've received new directives from the Federation Council on this matter...
 (continuing) Until we can find a way to counteract the warp field effect, the Council feels our best course is to slow the damage as much as possible... (beat) Therefore, areas of space found susceptible to warp fields will be restricted to essential travel only... (beat) And effective immediately, all Federation vessels will be limited to a speed of warp five, except in cases of extreme emergency.
 The Federation is sharing our data with all known warp-capable species. (MORE)
 All we can hope is that they realize it's in their best interests to take similar action.
 Starfleet is setting up a weather control network for Hekaras Two. It's only a temporary solution, but it should suffice for now.
 If there are no further questions, you're dismissed.
 Very well.
 (beat) But now I can't help but wonder if all the while I was really helping to destroy the very thing I hold dear.
 Captain's Log, Stardate 47410.2. The Atrean government has requested assistance in averting a natural disaster that is threatening their world. Two of their geologists have come aboard to discuss the problem, one of whom is a human who has been living on Atrea Four.
 PRAN TAINER stands before an OKUDAGRAM depicting a cross-section of the Atrean planet. Also present is Pran's human wife, JULIANA TAINER, a fiftyish woman dressed in Atrean fashion. The Atreans are a humanoid species, only slightly different from us.
 If you give your permission, we'll begin immediately.
 (to Pran and Juliana) I've assigned you quarters during the time we're here. Please make yourselves comfortable.
 That was wonderful, Doctor.
 And -- what do you think?
 Data, there might come a time in the future when she would find out anyway -- another accident, for example. Perhaps it would be easier for her to learn the truth from you.
 It's a difficult choice. (beat) You must do what you think best, Data. We will support any decision you make.
 Captain's Log, supplemental. The infusion of plasma into the core of Atrea Four has been accomplished. Pran Tainer's projections indicate that the core will remain molten for several hundred years.
 So... how old are you, Mister Worf?
 I wouldn't miss this for the world. How old are you?
 Report.
 Where is the information being sent now?
 Make it so.
 (reacts) The Utopia Planitia shipyard... they're responsible for new starship development...
 Mister Worf, start a long range scan of the region... see if there are any Cardassian ships nearby.
 Open a channel.
 This is Captain Jean-Luc Picard of the Starship Enterprise. You are in Federation territory. Please explain your presence here.
 We are repairing one of our subspace telescopes.
 No, thank you. We have everything under control.
 It's a long range subspace Array... it gathers data on astronomical phenomena.
 Certainly not.
 What do you mean?
 Imaging logs... Are you saying you have evidence that the Cardassians tampered with the Array?
 I haven't heard anything about this.
 Worf... are you feeling alright?
 Mister Data, perhaps you should re-examine the Array... see if you can find anything to support Worf's claims. (to Worf) In the meantime, Lieutenant... I think you should go to your quarters.
 (urgent) Now, Mister Worf! (beat) Now!
 (to Riker, re: Worf) Number One.
 (to Conn) Ensign, take us out of here, maximum warp.
 Are they pursuing?
 (to com) Bridge to Engineering. Status, Mister La Forge?
 What happened back there, Lieutenant?
 Granted.
 Captain... we appear to have the quantum signature you're looking for.
 Our Data has said the same thing.
 (nods) We'll prepare to launch it now.
 Enterprise here.
 Yes, Lieutenant. Is there a problem?
 How was the Bat'leth tournament?
 I don't know why they have to do this every year. In fact, I thought last year the teachers agreed not to do this anymore.
 Why does it have to be me?
 Their perception of me is a little... exaggerated.
 (to Riker) Don't you have something else to do?
 (to com) Put it through. (to Troi) Excuse me, Counselor.
 (continuing) Admiral.
 We're conducting an energy output study of the Mekoria Quasar. All systems normal, the ship is fully operational.
 I understand. What is our assignment?
 Very well.
 Oh... yes. It's for the children... I'm a... role model.
 Paul Menegay -- seven years old. He did an interesting clay sculpture of my head.
 Yes. (beat) Oh, you'll be interested to know that I've arranged for a Commander Riker day next month. I'm even considering making an entry myself.
 Energize.
 Pressman? Oh, of course. You were Wil's first commanding officer... on the Pegasus.
 I remember reading about it. The ship was destroyed by a... warp core breach as I recall.
 What are our orders?
 Very well. (to Riker) Set course for the Devolin system.
 Any sign of the Romulans?
 Mister La Forge?
 How slow?
 On screen.
 I am Captain Jean-Luc Picard of the Federation starship Enterprise.
 Not at all. But an... unannounced appearance like this could have unfortunate consequences. It would be a shame if your ship were damaged during such a... misunderstanding.
 I could ask you the same question.
 How interesting. So are we. Perhaps we could combine our efforts and share our findings.
 You are probably right.
 Then I won't keep you.
 Stand down from Red Alert, but continue to track their movements, Lieutenant.
 (to Geordi) Commander, how long will it take to search the system?
 Then we better get to it. Mister Data?
 ... as a matter of fact, I never met Wil before he reported aboard at Farpoint Station.
 I was looking through the records of about fifty candidates... Wil's was much like all the others... filled with the usual dry statistics and glowing letters of recommendation that tell you nothing. I was about to put it aside and go on to the next file, when something caught my eye. (MORE)
 (beat) There had been an incident on Altair Three when Wil was First Officer of the Hood. He refused to let Captain DeSoto beam down during a crisis. He disobeyed a direct order and risked a general court martial because he thought he was right. When I read that... I knew I'd found my Number One.
 I wanted someone who would stand up to me... someone who was more concerned with the safety of the ship and accomplishing the mission than with how something looked on his record. To me, that's one of the marks of a good officer.
 (gently) I am aware of that, Admiral.
 Admiral... the records regarding the loss of the Pegasus are a bit... vague about what happened just before you abandoned ship. Can you add anything to the... official account?
 Put the asteroid on the main viewer.
 Mister Data, how long will it take to determine the exact location of the Pegasus?
 Mister Data, is it possible to saturate the asteroid with verteron particles? That could mask the resonance signature from the Romulans... prevent them from detecting it.
 Data?
 Make it so, Mister Data.
 (to Riker) After he's finished, we'll have to move off... make it look like we scanned the asteroid, but didn't find anything.
 (to Pressman) If this works, the Romulans won't find anything and we can return later. But if it doesn't...
 Helm, one quarter impulse. Engage.
 (to Data) Mister Data, we have to convince the Romulans that we're still looking for the Pegasus. I want you to continue scanning this system.
 (to Riker) I want to be back at this asteroid at zero eight hundred hours tomorrow. Plot our search pattern accordingly.
 (to Pressman) Admiral, if you'd care to join me for a late dinner... ?
 (nods) Very well. (to Riker) Number One, you have the Bridge. Oh, and will you bring the scan analysis to my quarters when you go off watch?
 Come.
 Thank you. Can I interest you in some sashimi?
 Yes, there is.
 (continuing, reading) "Judge Advocate General's Report. Stardate xxxxx. Subject: Inquiry into Mutiny Aboard USS Pegasus."
 (continuing, reading) "Based on testimony from Captain Pressman and other surviving officers, the Judge Advocate believes there is sufficient evidence to conclude that certain members of the crew did mutiny against the captain just prior to the destruction of the Pegasus."
 (continuing) Mutiny... on a Federation starship. It's shocking -- no, it's unthinkable. And yet you've never mentioned it.
 It wasn't easy getting this record. I had to call in a few favors at Starfleet just to get a look at it. It seems the file was sealed by Starfleet Intelligence.
 (continuing) So... not only was the Pegasus carrying "sensitive" equipment that can't be allowed to fall into Romulan hands... (MORE)
 ... not only was there a mysterious explosion which appeared to destroy the ship, but didn't... but now it turns out there was a mutiny on board. (beat) I've read the official report of the mutiny. But I'd like to hear your version of what happened.
 Why?
 And you?
 (reading) "The Judge Advocate also believes that the surviving officers are deliberately withholding vital information from this inquiry. Further investigation is recommended." (to Riker) But there was no further investigation... the file was classified and quietly buried. (beat) Why?
 I'm taking it up with you. The Judge Advocate thought you were participating in a conspiracy to cover-up the truth. That you were lying about what really happened on the Pegasus. Now, I want you to tell me that's not true.
 (continuing, harsh) Wil, what the hell's going on here? Why did your crew mutiny? And why is Pressman so determined to find your ship twelve years later?
 Very well. He's an admiral, I'm a captain -- I can't force you to disobey him. (beat) I will tell you this... I need to place a great deal of trust in the person who serves as my first officer. You've had that trust... until now. But something is wrong here... and you're part of it. (beat) And when this mission is over... I may have to re-evaluate the command structure of this ship.
 (continuing) Dismissed.
 Margaret... something's very wrong here. Do you know what's going on?
 (to com) On my way.
 Mister Worf, where are the Romulans?
 (to Con) Bring us to within fifteen kilometers and hold position.
 Agreed. What about a shuttle? We could send it down through one of these fissures.
 Mister Data?
 Admiral... I don't think we can risk--
 Mister Data, please note in the ship's log that this action is being taken over my explicit objections.
 Yellow Alert.
 Mister Data, plot a course into the chasm... maneuvering thrusters only.
 Take us in.
 (sotto, to Pressman) Admiral, if the passage narrows to less than five hundred meters, I'm going to abort the mission.
 (continuing, sotto) You can charge me with insubordination if you wish, but I won't risk the Enterprise for a salvage operation.
 On screen.
 (to Data) If we begin a power transfer, can you restore life support to that compartment?
 Admiral, I'd like to send a complete Away Team to --
 Yes, sir.
 Picard to Away Team. Prepare to return to the ship immediately.
 The Romulans fired on the entrance to the chasm with their disruptors... they've sealed us in.
 On screen.
 Are you responsible for this?
 What is it you want, Sirol?
 Thank you for your... generous offer. I will... take it under advisement.
 Agreed. Options?
 That's what this is all about? A cloaking device? In the Treaty of Algeron the Federation specifically agreed not to develop cloaking technology.
 (hard) That treaty has kept the peace for sixty years. And as a Starfleet officer, you are sworn to uphold it.
 (to Riker) How can we use the cloak to escape the asteroid?
 (to Pressman) That's why you were so eager to find it...
 Except it's illegal... it's a violation of an agreement the Federation signed in good faith.
 Mister Data?
 Make it so.
 Captain's Log: Stardate 47457.1. We have been trapped inside the asteroid for over eight hours. Mister Data and Commander La Forge inform me that they are nearly ready to engage the cloak.
 Proceed, Number One.
 Report.
 (to Conn) Take us out. Maneuvering thrusters only.
 (to Riker) Disengage the cloaking device, Commander.
 They'll know the truth, Admiral. Which is what everyone is going to know very shortly. (to Riker) Carry out my orders.
 Mister Worf, send a message to the Warbird... inform them that their government will be contacted shortly regarding this incident.
 Admiral, I hereby charge you with violation of the Treaty of Algeron. As Captain of the Enterprise, I'm placing you under arrest. Mister Worf?
 You're going to need them.
 I've spoken to Fleet Admiral Shanthi. There will be a full inquiry once we reach Starbase two-four-seven... and it will probably lead to a general court martial of Admiral Pressman and several others at Starfleet Intelligence.
 (continuing) Your... involvement in this affair will be thoroughly investigated, Wil... there will be some hard questions for you to answer...
 You made a mistake twelve years ago... but your service since that time has earned you a great deal of respect... from me and from a great many others. This incident may cost you some of that respect...
 When the moment came to make the decision... you made the right one... (MORE)
 No matter what that choice may have cost you... and no matter how much Pressman may have meant to you... you chose to tell the truth and face the consequences.
 (continuing) As long as you can do that... you'll still deserve to wear that uniform... and I'll still be proud to have you as my first officer.
 Captain's Log, Stardate 47423.9. We have arrived at Boraal Two in response to an emergency distress call from Lieutenant Worf's foster brother, Nikolai Rozhenko. He has been stationed on the planet as a cultural observer.
 WORF is at Tactical; assorted N.D.s man the other / stations. The mood is serious.
 Mister Data, analysis.
 How far has it progressed?
 What was that?
 Keep an eye on it.
 (continuing) Mister Worf. Any luck?
 Especially under these circumstances...
 Very well. But regardless of this planet's immediate situation, we must still observe the Prime Directive. (MORE)
 (beat) I'd like to minimize the risk of contact with the inhabitants. You're to go alone, Mister Worf -- and I want you surgically altered to pass as a Boraalan.
 Doctor, you were fully aware that the atmospheric dissipation could not be stopped. What were you hoping to accomplish by assisting these people?
 I have no intention of compounding what you've already done by committing another gross violation of the Prime Directive.
 The Prime Directive is a principle we've all sworn to uphold. Until that is changed, we cannot follow any other course of action. Is that understood?
 I'm afraid that won't be possible. You may have full use of the ship's computers to set up a com link and upload your data from here.
 (continuing) If there's nothing further, you're dismissed.
 Of course.
 Put it on-screen...
 What's going on?
 This is one of the times when we must face the ramifications of the Prime Directive... and honor the lives we cannot save.
 Number One, I'll be in my Ready Room. You have the Bridge.
 You realize your career is finished.
 What do you expect us to do now? You've left us with a colony of Boraalans who think they're still on their planet.
 A home which would look very different from Boraal... you can't really believe they'd be fooled...
 What if it doesn't work? What if they become aware that something strange is going on?
 I'm not enthusiastic about this plan... but I don't see another option. We'll give it a try.
 And even then there's no guarantee we'll be able to find a suitable planet...
 What is it?
 (concerned) Why not?
 There's no way around it?
 That would take hours...
 Very well. Let's try it. (to Geordi) Monitor the situation closely, Mister La Forge. (MORE)
 Keep an open com link with the Holodeck so you can be apprised of any problems.
 Considering the situation you've put us in, I don't think it's wise to leave you alone with those people. Mister Worf will accompany you.
 No, the Boraalans already know you. There's no need to introduce anyone new.
 Keep a close eye on your brother. I don't want him making the situation any worse than it is.
 Picard here...
 Very well. (to helm) Helm. Set course for Vacca Six.
 I see... (long beat) How is he?
 Does he understand the situation?
 All right. Get in touch with Mister Worf... make sure he knows what's happened.
 Vorin, isn't it?
 Your planet was dying... it could no longer support life. So we took you away from it.
 We have the ability to create the... illusion of other places, like the caves on your planet. You have actually been on this starship for the last two days... not on Boraal.
 Vorin. Listen to me. We can travel to many worlds. We will take you to one where your people can build a new life...
 A chance... for your people... your culture... to survive and grow.
 Good. (to com) Mister La Forge. How much longer before we can transport the Boraalans?
 (to com) We'll have the Transporter room standing by... (MORE)
 We may need to transport the Boraalans whether you're ready or not. Keep Mister Worf apprised of the situation.
 (continuing) Commander, you have the Bridge... We still have one more problem to worry about...
 Vorin. We've arrived at the planet I told you about... (beat) Have you made a decision?
 I see. (beat) And what do you intend to tell them?
 If you tell them the truth -- what will happen? Will they believe you?
 It's possible they'll think you had an hallucination... or even that you're insane...
 On the other hand, they may believe your fantastic story. They would learn about alien worlds and starships...
 You can stay here. Make a future for yourself... with us.
 Captain's Log, Stardate 47427.2. The Boraalans have safely reached the site of what will eventually become their new village. None of them suspects they ever left their planet. However, our success has come at a high price...
 He said he had nowhere to go...
 But he wouldn't have died alone... and afraid...
 No, of course not. Our plan worked out well for them...
 (continuing) But I wish Vorin could have bridged the gap between our cultures. I would have liked the chance to know him better.
 Just a few more hours. Why?
 We're due at Starbase six-two-one tomorrow morning... but we can delay that for a few days. Yes... I'm sure we can find some time.
 I look forward to that tour. The Caldos Colony is really an impressive accomplishment. I actually feel like I'm in the Scottish Highlands.
 I'm curious, Governor... you're obviously not from Scotland. What drew you here?
 It would seem the Howard women have exceptionally... vigorous libidos.
 (reacts) Thirties?
 Well... it looks like we're going to be at Caldos for a few more days. This might give you a chance to get your grandmother's affairs in order.
 On screen.
 (to com) Bridge to Engineering. Mister Data, we're reading an extremely large storm system over the Caldos Colony. It was my understanding that the weather control malfunction was not severe.
 Make it so. (to Riker) In the meantime, Number One -- contact Governor Maturin. Tell him to expect some... rough weather.
 (shocked) What the hell is going on?
 Fog?
 Mister Data -- disengage the power transfer.
 Make it so.
 (continuing) In the meantime, I think I'll get my jacket.
 (re: PADD) Beverly... what the hell is this?
 Belay that order. (to Beverly) Beverly, you can't just... resign.
 Do you think this Ronin may be exerting some sort of influence on her... that she may be staying because of him?
 It's a rash decision... ill-considered... not like Beverly at all.
 Come.
 Where?
 I want you to go down to the cemetery... see if you can pinpoint the source.
 (to Troi) In the meantime, I would very much like to meet this... Ronin.
 Beverly...
 I'm sorry for startling you. I knocked, but there was no answer.
 I hoped to meet your new friend... Ronin.
 Oh. Well, if you don't mind I'll wait. I'm anxious to meet this remarkable young man who swept away not only one, but two of the Howard women.
 Beverly... did you change the color of your eyes?
 I think I liked your eyes the way they were before... (MORE)
 I think I liked you the way you were before, Beverly.
 No... there's something's wrong here. This is about more than just an obsessive love affair that's gotten out of hand... (beat) Why is it that no one has seen this Ronin except you?
 So, you're Ronin... it's a pleasure to meet you. Where are you from?
 How long have you been here on Caldos?
 That's a very... romantic notion. Especially for two people who have just met. Don't you think perhaps you're rushing into things a bit?
 (to com) Go ahead.
 Why? What are you afraid of?
 (to com) Mister Data, contact Governor Maturin and ask for permission to exhume the body. Picard out.
 Go ahead. But I'll be surprised if the governor knows who you are. He'll probably have the same questions I do. How did you come to Caldos? What ship did you arrive on?
 (hard) Answer the question, Ronin. What ship? I'd like to look at the passenger list. (pressing on) Where have you been living here on Caldos? What's your position here? Who are your neighbors?
 (continuing, quickly) Come on, Beverly -- we have to get out of here.
 I'm alright... (beat) Beverly... you must go after him... go to the cemetery...
 Helm, change course for the Argaya system -- maximum warp.
 I've just received new orders from Starfleet. We'll discuss it in the Observation Lounge.
 Anything?
 How close are we to the Cardassian border?
 How far inside Cardassian space is it?
 How the hell are we going to get it out of there... ?
 Can we get within Transporter range without crossing into Cardassian territory?
 (to com) Mister La Forge?
 (to com) Doctor, are you ready?
 Ensign...
 Ensign, you're with me.
 Bridge.
 (continuing) You're a certified pilot, aren't you?
 How long have you served on the Enterprise?
 I see... I understand you've been recommended for the Ops position. Do you think you're up to it?
 I'm not so sure. Your record concerns me.
 The incident you were involved in at the Academy.
 (interrupting) I'm not certain it matters how long it's been. What I need to know is whether you would ever do something like that again.
 (cutting her off) A dare-devil stunt? I should hope not. What concerns me more is that you participated in a coverup that impeded an official investigation into the death of a cadet.
 But you didn't. You went along with the others and pretended that what happened was nothing more than an accident. What do you suppose that tells me about your character?
 I'm very sorry you didn't enjoy your time at the Academy, Ensign. But as far as I'm concerned, you should have been expelled for what you did. Quite frankly, I don't know how you made it onto my ship.
 You're dismissed...
 If you're looking for a more lenient commander, I don't think you'll find one.
 Please do.
 All right, Ensign. I will...
 (continuing) It took a lot of courage to come here and face me after what I said to you the other day.
 (continuing) You see... I didn't call you in here then to assess your qualifications for the Ops position.
 I was harsh with you because I was assessing you for a very important mission. A mission that could involve a situation far more... unnerving than being dressed down by your commanding officer.
 Join the senior staff in the Observation Lounge at oh-nine hundred hours. We'll discuss it then.
 And Ensign... I do know how you ended up on the Enterprise. I asked for you.
 (continuing) I wanted to make sure you got a fair chance to redeem yourself.
 This is Joret Dal... he was in the escape pod we retrieved.
 (continuing) Joret is a member of the Cardassian military... he is also a Federation operative.
 (continuing) He risked his life to come here and give us invaluable information about Cardassia's strategic intentions -- information that could very well enhance the security of Bajor, as well as other planets in this sector. It is imperative that we get him safely back to Cardassian space.
 Once the shuttle is safely past the patrol, Joret will put you in an escape pod and send you back across the border.
 We'll be waiting here to pick you up.
 This is obviously a very dangerous mission. I'm not ordering you to take part in it.
 Very well, Ensign. Report to Sickbay. (off her reaction) Doctor Crusher will explain.
 (continuing) I'd also ask you not to discuss this mission with anyone...
 Prepare a probe and launch when ready.
 Captain's Log, supplemental. We have intercepted a Cardassian report stating that a Bajoran prisoner escaped her captor... and was killed in an evacuation pod as she tried to leave Cardassian space...
 To all personnel with security clearance J-one and higher... this is the Captain. It is my sad duty to inform you --
 -- that a member of the crew... Ensign Sito Jaxa...
 Has been lost in the line of duty...
 She was the finest example of a Starfleet officer... a young woman of remarkable courage... and strength of character.
 Her absense will be deeply felt by all who knew her...
 What's the last thing you remember?
 Captain's Log, Stardate 47615.2. We have encountered a rogue comet in sector one-one-five-six. It is not native to this region of space, and there is no previous record of this object on any Federation charts.
 STARFLEET officers man the other positions. Everyone is studying the Viewscreen.
 (to Data) Begin a full sensor analysis, Mister Data. Log the results for the Federation Astrophysical Survey.
 What was that?
 (nods) Very well, Mister Worf. Fire...
 Mister Data... What are we looking at? Is it a ship?
 (considers) There are no technologically advanced cultures in that system now... but perhaps there were eighty-seven million years ago.
 It's possible the frozen gasses simply accumulated over time as it travelled through space...
 But the question remains: why? What is its purpose?
 What makes you say that?
 Data... do you believe you're in communication with that object?
 Very well... Mister LaForge, give him a hand.
 (thoughtful) Perhaps. And if this really is an archive from some ancient civilization, we should allow it to do so. But we must be careful... (beat) Mister Worf, keep an eye on the sensors. If the Archive poses any danger to the ship, I want you to sever the connection immediately.
 Come.
 Come in, Number One...
 (correcting him) Ceremonial... and deceptively primitive. Only an advanced technological culture could have built that object out there. These artifacts must have played a ritualistic role in their society.
 It's possible... and if so, this could be a find of enormous significance. This "library" seems designed to do far more than simply store information. Who knows how much we could learn from it?
 (nods) It seems to be a symbol of some significance.
 (offers) The concept of the four cardinal compass directions is common to many different cultures...
 Perhaps everything with the compass design is part of the same theme -- movement. Finding a direction, travelling a path, crossing a boundary--
 The ultimate boundary.
 I keep seeing this symbol, too.... but it's never prominently displayed...
 Always in the background... smaller than the others...
 I have no idea.
 (cautiously) What is it you want?
 Are you Masaka?
 What have you done to Commander Data?
 Yes.
 (to com) Counselor Troi, report to Engineering immediately.
 (continuing) Ihat. The place you came from... Is it a cultural archive of your species?
 Are there others like you there?
 Who is Masaka?
 (pressing) I would like to know more about this Masaka... perhaps we can speak --
 (gravely, to N.D. Security) Get him to Sickbay.
 And apparently one all too willing to go to his death.
 Mister La Forge, continue to scan the Archive. Try to find some way to access it. In the meantime, I'll see what I can learn from these "people" inside Data.
 (gently) It's all right... I'm not going to hurt you...
 (continuing) I need to speak to Ihat. Do you understand me? Ihat...
 Whoever took your place wasn't afraid of Masaka -- he almost seemed eager for his fate.
 Then Masaka is your queen... ?
 Then should we try to keep her asleep?
 Where is he?
 What's wrong?
 Of what?
 Masaka?
 (taps combadge) Picard to Bridge! Report!
 Has there been any damage to the ship?
 (to com) I'll be right there...
 I... I... won't... leave you... (beat) Please... let go...
 (barely) Yes...
 I'd say it's Masaka. Ihat referred to her as a queen... it's not unusual in ceremonial cultures for royalty to be symbolized by a sun.
 (nods) According to Data, the sun image is also the symbol for death.
 There it is again... this U-shaped symbol... small and insignificant... almost like an afterthought...
 Into living plants? How is that possible?
 I don't think we have a choice... we'll have to destroy the Archive. Mister Worf?
 Make it so.
 There's so much here we could have learned... I regret losing that opportunity.
 (to Geordi) What's our status?
 So it's using our ship -- our alloys, our DNA, -- to create elements of its own culture...
 It could even be a sophisticated terraforming device.
 The Archive creates an environment... all the elements which enable a culture to exist...
 But whatever the intent behind the process, I don't want this ship transformed into an alien city. Mister La Forge, do you have any ideas?
 Good, keep at it...
 But somehow... I believe the answer lies there...
 ... with Masaka. We need to find her... access her... talk to her.
 (cautious) Hello...
 The fire feels good...
 Tell me... about Masaka.
 Yes... how can I talk to her?
 Yes. It's important. Can you tell her I must speak with her?
 Korgano... who is that?
 Ihat?
 Masaka is taking over my ship.
 I want to talk with her... but I'm told only Korgano can do that.
 An old man... Masaka's father...
 How can I find Korgano?
 Where has he gone?
 If Masaka is looking for a sacrifice... she can take me instead. (beat) Perhaps then she'd stop looking for you.
 All right. Tell me what to do...
 Very well. How do I do that?
 Give me the sign.
 Ihat... the sign. What is it?
 Yes.
 Masaka, show yourself. I'll go with you...
 Let me help you...
 I need your help. I need the sign for the temple. (beat) Masaka's temple.
 A line... as the unending horizon... (beat) A curve...
 (continuing) A line... as the unending horizon.
 Thank you.
 Are the others dead? Did Masaka kill them?
 Will it accept the symbol for Masaka's temple?
 (considers) Ihat risked his life to show me that symbol... and Masaka killed him for doing it. (beat) I think we have to risk it.
 (to com) Commander Riker, we're ready...
 (re: throne) This would seem to be Masaka's temple...
 Ihat said creating the temple would get her attention... it may take time before she shows herself.
 I don't know.
 This is the first time I've seen these two symbols paired... That could be significant...
 (continuing) There it is again... and again. Clearly this is an important pairing...
 (continuing) "He's not chasing her anymore... "
 Ihat said that someone named Korgano was not chasing Masaka anymore. And the old man said, "he pursues her no longer... "
 (continuing) In a sense, this smaller symbol is chasing Masaka. Perhaps it represents Korgano.
 Both Ihat and the old man said that Korgano was the only one who could control Masaka... (beat, thinking) Many ritualistic cultures incorporate the idea of "balance" into their belief systems. Masaka is a queen, a powerful, god-like figure... it's not unreasonable to assume that she might have a counterpart... or a consort...
 (continuing) Spread out... see if you can find that horn-like symbol anywhere else.
 Maybe it's simpler than that. (beat) Maybe the relationship between them is more like the sun and the moon.
 Exactly. Two powerful rulers, changing places in a continuous cycle...
 If we could find Korgano within the Archive and bring him out... perhaps he could force Masaka to leave.
 (considers) Ihat and the others didn't seem to be afraid of Korgano...
 (continuing) Masaka...
 (continuing) Masaka, I am Jean-Luc Picard of the Federation--
 (presses on) Please listen to us. Your Archive is destroying our ship--
 Then we'll have to find someone she will listen to.
 Mister La Forge, access the transformation program.
 (continuing) When you're ready, input the symbol.
 In some sense, Korgano is Masaka's nemesis. Whatever this symbol represents -- it might give us a way to control her. (beat) If you have a better idea, I'd be glad to entertain it.
 Initiate the transformation.
 Perhaps we've been approaching this incorrectly. We're dealing with a highly ritualistic culture... a society based on symbol and myth. Maybe we need to confront them on those terms instead... (beat) If I can incorporate myself into their rituals, perhaps Masaka will listen to me.
 I'm not entirely sure. But there are similarities between this culture and others I've studied. (beat) I suppose I'll just have to improvise.
 Mister Worf, what's our status?
 Masaka!
 Are you surprised to see me?
 You should know that's impossible.
 Do you really want to be the prey... forever?
 But without me... you aren't complete. I know you, Masaka... you live for the chase just as much as I do. (MORE)
 (beat) Won't you miss being the hunter... pursuing me... forcing me from the sky so that you can rise again?
 I think you may be getting tired... it's difficult to brighten the sky forever...
 Only so you can wake at dawn... and begin the hunt again...
 As am I.
 Acknowledged. (to Data) Mister Data -- are you all right?
 I'm afraid it will take some time to explain.
 Captain's Log, Stardate 47612.4. Commander La Forge has managed to disable the alien transformation program. Starfleet will send an archaeological team to study the Archive further.
 I don't understand... I thought all the alien artifacts had disappeared from the Enterprise.
 I can imagine. Doctor Crusher said there might have been dozens of personalities inside you.
 Well, Data, you may never become fully human... but you've had an experience that transcends the human condition. (beat) You have been an entire civilization.
 (wry) Nonetheless... it's time to stand watch on the night shift.
 Try to get more power to the field coils.
 Geordi, report.
 Acknowledged. (to Data) Release the exterior hull plate. We may have to jettison the core.
 How did he seem then?
 In my years as a Starship Captain, I've had to notify many families that they'd lost a loved one. But never to suicide. I'd like to be able to offer Lieutenant Kwan's family some explanation for what happened -- to help them make sense of it.
 (to Troi and Worf) I want the two of you to try and piece together a picture of his last few days.
 You're authorized to do so.
 Go ahead.
 Geordi, the medical situation on Barson Two has worsened -- Starfleet has given us permission to exceed warp speed limitations so we can get back on schedule.
 Acknowledged.
 Captain's Log, Stardate 47623.2. We've arrived at Starbase Three-twenty-eight on schedule. After taking aboard medical supplies, we will depart for Barson Two.
 Do you remember anything else?
 Clearly this was much more than an empathic echo. It seems that you were actually seeing something that happened in the control room eight years ago.
 Let's put that question aside for a moment and assume that by some unexplained phenomenon, you witnessed an event that may have involved Lieutenant Kwan. (to Troi) The faces you saw -- did you recognize them?
 The woman seemed terrified of something... then you saw her again, laughing -- presumably at Lieutenant Kwan.
 Counselor... I want you to look over the personnel files from Utopia Planitia and see if you can identify the faces you saw.
 Very well, Counselor.
 What else have you found?
 Captain's Log, Stardate 47653.2. We are performing field tests of our new tactical systems and weapon upgrades. Mister Worf is supervising the exercises.
 stations. Worf is enjoying himself immensely -- he's in his element. Picard, on the other hand, seems a little bored.
 Sounds fascinating, Mister Worf. Please proceed.
 Fire when ready.
 Abort and destroy.
 Maintain a sensor lock on the torpedo -- we'll have to go after it.
 Then I'll take a shuttlecraft to retrieve it. (to Data) Mister Data, you're with me.
 I happen to be a reasonably qualified pilot, Number One. (beat) Besides, these... tests hardly require the Captain's personal attention.
 (on the move) In the meantime, Mister Worf -- you should consider analyzing your new guidance system.
 Picard to Data. Report to Shuttlebay Two.
 Captain's Log, supplemental. Commander Data and I have recovered the stray torpedo after a three day search. We are enroute back to the Enterprise.
 Have they been delayed?
 Scan the vicinity... see if you can find them...
 Life signs?
 Adjust our axial stabilizers to match the attitude and rotation rate of the Enterprise... (beat) I'm going to dock the shuttle manually...
 Any sign of the crew?
 What's that smell?
 That sounds like... animals.
 (continuing) Look at this...
 But it seems to be humanoid...
 This is Commander Troi's quarters... can you tell if she's inside?
 I want to take a look inside. Stand ready.
 The environmental settings in this room have been altered...
 Deanna!
 (horrified) What's happened to her... ?
 What... is she?
 She's been injured...
 You mean, she's been bitten?
 (nods) First we've got to get the ship under control... let's go to the Bridge.
 It looks like he's been attacked by some sort of animal... (beat) Has his DNA changed, as well?
 (working) I've restored attitude control to the ship. But I can't get main power back on-line... it looks like the entire power transfer grid has been destroyed...
 Then the entire ship has been affected...
 Commander Riker... ?
 (reacts) Wil... ?
 I think he's trying to communicate...
 (gently) Wil, can you --
 He looks almost... proto-human.
 This tranquilizer should keep him unconscious for another seven hours. (beat) What have you found out?
 Introns?
 So these... introns are causing her DNA to re-combine in an earlier configuration?
 Commander Riker's introns are changing him into one of the earlier hominids...
 What about crewmembers who are not from Earth?
 How long before I start to change?
 Which will be what... ?
 Well... before I begin scurrying about, searching for food, we need to find some answers. (beat) How do we reverse the process?
 Agreed.
 They sound hungry.
 It would seem the intron virus isn't limited to humanoid lifeforms.
 What is it?
 So... Spot gave birth to the kittens while she was... changing into a reptilian form?
 As I remember my biology, there are several natural immune systems that come into play in the womb of the mother... to protect the unborn from viral infections...
 Maybe we could... inhibit this intron virus by using some of the natural antibodies in Spot's amniotic fluid...
 Then perhaps we should locate a humanoid who's pregnant...
 Then we need to locate Nurse Ogawa.
 The Arboretum...
 I'd better check the status of the warp core...
 (calls out) Data!
 (shaken) What was that?
 A spider?
 I have the most intense feeling of... fear... panic... as if I were being watched... (beat) I can't explain it.
 If that's the case, then my instincts tell me... we'd better hurry.
 How soon can you have it ready?
 (anxious) What -- what's that?
 Worf...
 Set your phaser to heavy stun.
 (re: howl) Listen to that... he sounds angry... aggressive... (thinks) What does Worf want... is he responding to some sort of predatory instinct? Does he see us as prey?
 Then... what does he want? (MORE)
 (thinking) Predators use vocalizations to frighten off other predators... to mark territory... and to initiate the mating process... (that's it) The mating process...
 (continuing) Counselor Troi has been bitten by a Klingon... but it's not in a life-threatening location... nowhere near a major artery or organ...
 (continuing) And look at the wound itself... the penetration of the bite is very shallow, as if he didn't intend to seriously injure her...
 Is it possible that Worf thinks of Troi as his mate?
 We... we can't just leave. We've got to stay here and protect her... and keep working on the retro-virus... (thinks) If we can't stun him, then we'll have to distract him somehow... lure him away from Deanna...
 Klingons have a highly developed sense of smell... if we could duplicate Deanna's pheromones, we might be able to convince him she has left Sickbay... and is somewhere else on the ship...
 Can you amplify the pheromones? They'll have to be far more powerful than Deanna's actual scent.
 No... you... you must stay here... continue working on the retro-virus...
 (continuing) I'll go...
 (urgent) No time... no time to argue.
 (to Lift) Deck Seventeen.
 Go ahead.
 (to com) Acknowledged.
 I'm fine, Mister Data. Proceed...
 (continuing, quiet) Well, Mister Worf... let's hope you wake up feeling like a new man.
 Captain's log, supplemental. Commander Data has succeeded in returning the crew to normal. Doctor Crusher has determined that the synthetic T-cell she used to cure Mister Barclay's Urodelan flu initiated the intron virus which swept through the ship.
 Captain's Log: Stardate 47751.2. The Enterprise has arrived at Starbase Three One Zero for a meeting with Fleet Admiral Necheyev. This visit will also give us the opportunity to pick up a... member of the family.
 tea service has been laid out. There is also a plate of small sandwiches, and a tray of odd-looking crackers. Riker ENTERS.
 Good.
 I'm trying to establish a new relationship with the Admiral. There's been a certain amount of... tension between us in the past.
 I'd like to get things started on a better note this time. I want to make her feel at ease... that she's welcome aboard the Enterprise...
 We don't have to like her Wil, we simply have to follow her orders. However, maintaining an atmosphere of confrontation serves no purpose.
 (warm) Admiral, welcome aboard the Enterprise.
 Admiral, may I offer you some --
 Yes, as a matter of fact. I took the liberty of speaking to your aide, Commander Wrightwell... he said you were quite fond of them.
 You were saying something about the Cardassians I believe...
 (off PADD) This border will put several Federation colonies in Cardassian territory... and some Cardassian colonies in ours.
 The colonists are not going to be very happy about that... some of them have been there for decades.
 Dorvan Five... that's where the group of North American Indians has settled, isn't it?
 (continuing) Admiral... centuries ago, the North American Indians were forcibly displaced from their ancestral lands. This group on Dorvan Five originally left Earth two hundred years ago because they wanted to preserve their cultural identities.
 There are certain... disturbing historical parallels here. Once again, these people are being asked to leave their homes because of political decisions made by a distant government.
 Then perhaps we should not have allowed them to settle the planet originally. But to go to them twenty years later and ask them to leave what is now their home...
 What if the Indians should... refuse to evacuate?
 No. That won't be necessary.
 I understand.
 You are always welcome on this ship, Admiral.
 Oh. I'm sorry to disturb you, Mister Crusher. I assumed you would be up at this hour. I could come back later.
 No, that's quite all right. This was my first chance to welcome you back.
 So... how's Boothby?
 You guess?
 But you'd had enough of his insights.
 Well, as I said, welcome back, Mister Crusher. I hope you enjoy your vacation. That's really all I came here to say.
 Captain's Log: Supplemental. The Enterprise has arrived at Dorvan Five and I have spoken to the Leader of the Tribal Council. He has agreed to meet with us this afternoon to discuss the situation.
 Anthwara... I am afraid there is very little I can do. The decision regarding this planet was made at the highest levels of the Federation.
 I must point out that when you first came to this world, you were warned that it was the subject of a dispute between the Federation and the Cardassians. You were asked not to settle here.
 I understand and respect the long journey of your people. But I believe we can help you find a new home.
 And if those worlds don't meet with your approval, then we'll find you other choices.
 I can assure you that we will not impose a weather control system or anything else on your people. Whatever world you choose to colonize will be completely yours to do with as you please.
 That's not true. I have a great deal of respect for your beliefs and the meaning they hold for your people.
 In the meantime, I would like to invite you all to the Enterprise this evening as our guests.
 ... so I've been trying to familiarize myself with the history and traditions of your people. I was quite interested to learn that it was your grandfather -- Katowa -- who led the group of Indians who initially left Earth two centuries ago.
 It must have been a very difficult decision for your grandfather to make... uprooting your people... leading them into the unknown for an undetermined amount of time... not even knowing if you ever would find a new home.
 (quiet) It's never easy to leave one's home... to give up the safe and familiar. But there are times when the greater good demands that sacrifices be made... I'm sure your grandfather knew that.
 A great deal actually. My father was a strong believer in passing along the family history and traditions.
 (smiles) I hope that by the end of this matter, you won't look at me as your opponent. (beat) My family. Well... our roots in Western Europe go back to the time of Charlemagne.
 In a sense, that's exactly what's happened. Wesley left here three years ago as a boy... but now he's a young man. That can't be an easy transition for a mother... or a son.
 I heard about the incident with Geordi.
 I don't mean to make light of that by any means... but I must say that I went through the same thing. (MORE)
 (off her look) Oh, yes. I nearly washed out my sophomore year... there were a lot of different factors... my father's death... a teenage love affair with the wrong girl... the point is, I realized what was happening to me and I pulled myself out of it. I'm sure Wesley will do the same.
 (gently) I don't think he wants either of us to talk to him right now.
 Perhaps. But he has to want that help. If he doesn't, then any effort on our part might only push him further away.
 (continuing) Let him work this out on his own, Beverly.
 Anthwara... I deeply regret that we have not been able to reach an agreement. (beat) But, to put it bluntly, I cannot take no for an answer. (beat) This planet will be handed over to the Cardassian government as per the terms of the border agreement. I am very sorry... but you will have to leave.
 Then I will be forced... to remove you... by any means necessary.
 (firm) This is not a racial issue... it has nothing to do with ancient hatreds... or with the fact that we have different colored skin. I might just as easily have been a Vulcan or Andorian captain. The orders from Starfleet would have been the same.
 Anthwara... I may regret doing it, but --
 I was... unaware of that incident... or of the man you named. (beat) But that was seven hundred years ago and I don't see how it has any bearing on --
 (quiet) We should return to the Enterprise.
 (surprised) Mister Worf... what's going on?
 I'm Captain Jean-Luc Picard of the Enterprise.
 May I have a word with you... alone?
 (quiet) It was my understanding that there would be no Cardassian presence on this world for another six weeks. Your arrival here may upset some very... delicate negotiations.
 I would be happy to explain it to you... but for now, I must ask that you and your men leave... immediately.
 Very well... complete your mission... (his voice hardens) But, this is still Federation territory, Gul Evek... until that changes, this world is under my jurisdiction... and I will protect it.
 It is a fact... and I suggest you keep it in mind as you conduct your... survey.
 No, sir.
 Admiral, I have every reason to believe that these people will resist any attempt to remove them. I strongly urge you to request an emergency session of the Federation Council. The issue of Dorvan Five must be reopened.
 Anthwara believes that I am responsible for the crimes of one of my ancestors against his people...
 No, of course not. I respect their beliefs... but that can't have any bearing on our mission. (beat) But at the same time... I wonder if a dark chapter in my family history is about to repeat itself. (off Riker's look) If these people take up arms against us... there's no way to foresee the consequences.
 (to com) Picard to Worf. Will you come in here for a moment?
 Mister Worf... begin preparations to remove the inhabitants from Dorvan Five.
 (furious) Inexcusable. You defied the orders of the ranking officer on the scene... put the entire Away Team in jeopardy... and made an already tense situation worse. Your actions reflect poorly on this ship and on that uniform. I want an explanation Mister Crusher, and I want it now.
 (interrupting) That does not change the fact that my orders are to --
 (hard) That is not your decision to make, Cadet. (beat) Now, I don't know what's gotten into you lately, and right now I don't care. (MORE)
 But I will tell you this -- while you wear that uniform, you will obey every order you're given and you will conform to Starfleet regulations and rules of conduct. Is that clear?
 Go ahead, Number One.
 Let him come aboard. I'll meet with him in here.
 Stand-by, Mister Worf. (urgent, to Evek) Have your ship lock-on to your people and beam them out of there now, before something happens.
 Gul Evek, those people down there are Federation citizens and I am sworn to protect them. If your troops attack the village, my security forces will respond...
 I do. That's why we need to stop this now, before it's too late.
 Evek, the last war caused massive destruction... took millions of lives. Don't send our two peoples back down that path... not like this. History is in your hands -- right now. Give us one last chance for peace.
 (to Riker) Beam up our Away Team immediately, Number One.
 Anthwara... I want to make absolutely sure you understand the implications of this agreement. By giving up your status as Federation citizens... any future request you or your people make for assistance from Starfleet will go unanswered. You will be on your own... and under Cardassian jurisdiction.
 It will take some doing... but with Admiral Necheyev's support, I think they'll go along with it in the end.
 Captain's Log: Stardate 47755.3. The Enterprise is preparing to leave Dorvan Five. But former cadet Wesley Crusher will be staying behind. It seems that during the crisis, he met... an old friend.
 Where will you go?
 Well... good luck, Mister... (with affection) ... good luck Wesley.
 (to N.D.) Energize.
 As a result, the Kearsarge won't be able to rendezvous with us for another four days.
 Yes. And, as it looks as though we'll have a few days of relative quiet, I'm going to take advantage of the time by visiting the Hatarian System. There are ancient ruins there just being excavated.
 (to Worf) This might be a good time to recalibrate the weapon targeting array.
 (continuing) Mister Worf?
 Very good. (to all) Dismissed.
 (continuing, to Worf) Lieutenant... could I have a word with you?
 (continuing) Several times during the briefing you seemed a bit... distracted.
 Is everything all right?
 I see...
 He's had so little opportunity to spend time among Klingons... I doubt if he fully appreciates what a rich cultural heritage he comes from.
 What about the Klingon outpost on Maranga Four... I'm sure they'll celebrate the festival there.
 The Enterprise could be there in a fraction of that time, and still be back here for our rendezvous.
 I'm willing to bet Stellar Dynamics would like nothing better than to make a trip around the Nebula; it'll give them the chance to study it that much more thoroughly.
 Report.
 On screen.
 Open a channel.
 This is Captain Jean-Luc Picard of the --
 Isolate the bandwidth and let the signal through the shields.
 Bok...
 (to Worf) Put a tractor beam on that probe and determine if it's safe to beam it aboard. I want to know where it came from.
 Mister Data, see if there's any mention of a Jason Vigo in Federation records. (beat) You might start with Miranda Vigo -- she was born on New Gaul about forty years ago...
 Contact the Ferengi Government and find out what you can about Bok. He was wearing a Daimon's uniform -- if he's regained his rank, I want to know why.
 Come.
 How old is the boy now?
 Picard to Bridge. Set course for the Camor system, warp five.
 Wil... I appreciate your not asking, but you have the right to know...
 There is a possibility that the boy is my son... I was involved with his mother for a short time about twenty four years ago. I met her through a friend during shore-leave on Earth. It was all very romantic... (smiles) -- probably because we both knew I'd be leaving in two weeks... we kept in touch for a short while, but we never managed to get together again...
 No... either Bok's got it wrong and I'm not the father, or Miranda decided she wanted to raise the child on her own. Quite frankly it wouldn't surprise me. She was very independent... very strong-willed...
 Whether he's really my son or not, the fact is he's in danger. Bok tried to kill me six years ago... I have no doubt he intends to make good on his threat against the boy...
 What about his mother's?
 Miranda was trained as a botanist... she used to talk about running a farm some day. We might start with the agricultural areas.
 There can't be too many non-Camorites among them. Try scanning for human life-signs.
 What about males?
 That's seven, you said there were eight humans.
 Male or female?
 Unless he was forced to.
 Relay his coordinates to the Transporter Room and have them beam him aboard.
 That's right. I'm Captain Picard... Jean-Luc Picard.
 We thought you were in danger.
 Are you Jason Vigo?
 In a manner of speaking... someone's made a threat against his life.
 Jason... I'm an old friend of your Mother's. I came here because you're in danger.
 The person who made the threat is under the impression that... that you are my son...
 I don't know...
 Perhaps we should contact her... ?
 I'm sorry...
 Jason... I think it's important that we find out one way or another. Would you be willing to permit a genetic test?
 Once he's made aware of the fact, I expect he won't...
 What were you doing down in that cave? Are you a seismologist?
 Without an antigrav harness... ?
 So... what do you do?
 I see...
 Archaeological fragments I've collected over the years...
 (continuing) This is a Silvan glyph stone...
 (continuing) And this is a Gorlan prayer stick... it's extremely rare...
 Not really. Only to students of archaeology like myself. Still, I had to give up a very old bottle of Saurian brandy for it.
 Perhaps... but I value it nonetheless...
 Would you like some tea?
 Something else?
 Tea, Earl Grey, hot.
 Well. I'm sure this whole thing is as much a surprise to you as it is to me...
 I'll be honest with you, Jason. I was with your mother for only a short time. I would like to have known her better... but it didn't work out that way.
 You look a lot like her -- it's your eyes, I think...
 (continuing) I want to be clear about one thing -- your mother didn't tell me about you. If she had... I would have been part of your life.
 It would be best if you stayed aboard the Enterprise... until we can resolve the situation with Bok.
 Years ago, I was forced to destroy a starship that was under his son's command. Apparently Bok feels it would be fitting vengeance to kill my son.
 Of course not. We're trying to locate Bok... I intend to confront him, settle this matter.
 I assure you -- no one's more eager to get this behind us than I am.
 We'll give you quarters.
 Jason... your being here... I hope it will give us the chance to get to know each other.
 Understood.
 On screen.
 Thank you for taking the time to talk to us, Daimon.
 Yes, it concerns Daimon Bok.
 But he's no longer there?
 Buy himself out?
 Considering that he is dangerous and unstable, I trust you've kept track of him?
 I see. Do you have any idea of his present whereabouts?
 That cluster consists of over twenty star systems...
 (to helm) Plot a course and take us out of orbit.
 I think I need to talk to a parent.
 I'm not sure I can tell you. He's put up so many barriers... I don't really know what's underneath.
 I can't imagine that he'll ever accept me. He won't even talk to me.
 Perhaps. But surely it would be wrong of me to force the issue.
 (continuing) He's made it clear he doesn't want to pursue a relationship... I believe I should respect his feelings.
 What I sense about this young man... is that he's very independent. (beat) I think it's best if I leave him alone. Let him come to me if he wants.
 Security to Captain's quarters.
 Could it have been another hologram?
 Bok once used a mind control device to make me hallucinate.
 Good. Keep me posted.
 I want you to assign a security detail to Jason.
 I'm not the target of Bok's threats. Jason is.
 (cutting him off) His criminal record?
 Trespassing?
 Yes, thank you.
 (off-screen) Good morning...
 Because... Bok appeared in my quarters last night.
 It may not have been Bok -- just an image of him. We're investigating.
 I don't think that's wise...
 I know you have. But Bok is extremely dangerous. He has a starship, technology --
 You seem to enjoy rock climbing. Our Holodeck can create some very challenging climbs.
 (continuing) Why don't I take you down there and show you how to use the programs?
 Perhaps we could do a climb together... (off Jason's look) I'm probably not as skilled as you, but I'm not inexperienced.
 Of course. (beat) There are other sports programs... fending, for example. Have you ever fenced?
 I think it might appeal to you. It's very physical... demanding --
 Captain's Log, Stardate 47829.1. We've been in the Xendi Kabu system for over three hours, and still no sign of Bok.
 Go ahead.
 Understood.
 Why didn't we detect it before?
 On screen.
 (continuing) Another holographic device?
 A message?
 Can you translate it?
 He's proved he can get to us whenever he wants. What's he waiting for?
 Tea, earl grey -- hot.
 It's a risky game you're playing, coming here. Next time we'll be ready for you. Why don't we settle this now?
 It was self-defense. He fired on my ship.
 I didn't know that. If he'd told me I would have withdrawn. (beat) I'm sorry, but there's nothing I can do to bring him back.
 (firm) You can't put a price on a life.
 No...
 What do you mean degenerative?
 Is he going to be all right... ?
 Is there any... facility we can take him to -- where they might have special expertise?
 I know you will... I'm sorry. It's just hard for me to accept that there's nothing I can do...
 I've been thinking about what you said the other day. You were right, you know. I convinced myself Jason didn't want me to reach out to him... (beat) Because I don't have the faintest idea how to do it.
 But nothing I try seems to work.
 I'm just not sure that's going to be enough in his case. (beat) I found out he has a criminal record. Nothing terribly serious -- petty theft, that sort of thing -- but... he's a grown man. Is it too late for him to turn around?
 And be patient.
 My understanding is that such devices were impractical.
 What range would this kind of transporter have?
 Is there any way to keep him from beaming aboard the Enterprise again?
 If he has the ability to beam aboard, he might be able to beam someone away.
 I'm concerned that he's going to try to take Daniel -- is there any way we can protect him?
 Make it so.
 Open.
 Would you mind waiting outside?
 I like climbing. There's something about... literally having your fate in your own hands.
 I came to tell you that we may have found a way to locate Bok's ship... this might be over soon.
 I thought it might make you feel better.
 Jason... after your mother and I parted... I lost track of her completely. (beat) I'd like to know more about what happened to her... if you don't mind telling me.
 Well... why did you go to Camor? It seems an unlikely place for a woman and a child...
 (smiling) That was Miranda, all right.
 (understanding) I see...
 I'm sorry...
 Jason... isn't there some way I can be a father to you?
 My father and I were estranged... he thought I should stay home and tend the vineyards and I wanted to join Starfleet. He died before we could come to terms about it... and I've regretted that all my life. (beat) I don't want the same thing to happen to us.
 That's not so...
 (beat) I know.
 I'm aware of your trouble with the Camor authorities.
 It doesn't change anything. You're still my son. And, like it or not, I'm your father. I don't know what that means, but I know it means something. That we're... connected...
 At the very least... (smiles) -- I know you'll never look at your hairline the same way again.
 Come on -- let's get to the top of this thing...
 You wanted to see me?
 Picard, here.
 Have you been able to locate Bok's ship?
 On screen.
 Plot a course -- maximum warp.
 (to Data) The modifications you made to our Transporter... is there any way you could try a subspace transport from here and get me aboard Bok's ship?
 (to Data) You're with me.
 We'll deal with that when the time comes.
 Understood...
 Lower your weapons or Bok is dead...
 You know as well as I do, Bok... he's not my son.
 I know what you did... Miranda Vigo is Jason's mother... but, I am not his father... it only appeared as if I were because you resequenced his DNA...
 But your technique was flawed... Jason began to suffer from a neurological disorder... when my ship's Doctor investigated its cause, she discovered what you'd done...
 There was never going to be any ransom. All Bok has ever cared about was vengeance.
 He is no longer a Daimon -- he was stripped of command.
 He lied to you so you'd help him carry out his plan.
 (continuing) The Enterprise is closing in on your position... if you let us both go now, you won't be attacked.
 They'll cripple your vessel and keep you here until the Ferengi authorities arrive.
 (continuing) You'll have a great deal of explaining to do... your only hope is to turn Bok over to them and tell them that he deceived you.
 Captain's Log, Stardate 47831.8. At Jason's request, the Enterprise has returned to Camor Five.
 I'm glad to hear it...
 Are you sure you wouldn't like to stay aboard the Enterprise for a few more days?
 I understand...
 I will...
 I slipped a little something into your bag while you were packing...
 (continuing, smiles) I know you'd prefer a bottle of Saurian brandy... but this is all I could come up with.
 I want you to have it...
 Energize...
 I can barely see.
 Much better. (beat) Would you like to try it again?
 Well... Shakespeare witnessed the end of the Renaissance and the birth of the modern era. Prospero found himself in a world which no longer had any use for his powers...
 (continuing) Here he is about to perform one final creative act before giving up his art forever.
 Yes, but he had a certain... expectancy as well. A hopefulness about the future...
 (continuing) Shakespeare enjoyed mixing opposites...
 (continuing) Past and future... Despair and hope...
 (continuing) Data, is this part of your program?
 Then what is it?
 A train?
 Computer, end program.
 (continuing, louder) Computer, end program...
 It's just a scrape... I'll have it seen to...
 Yes, yes, I know about the Orient Express... but what was it doing on Prospero's Island?
 Could this malfunction affect the other Holodecks as well?
 All right, get to it. And shut down all of the Holodecks until you're finished, just to be on the safe side.
 I never realized you were interested in trains. Did you know that at its peak, the Orient Express carried over ten thousand passengers a year?
 Then what?
 I wonder what they talked about... ?
 (taps combadge) Picard here.
 (to com) Very good. I'm on my way.
 Captain's Log, Stardate 47869.2. After weathering an unexpected magnascopic storm in the Mekorda Sector, we are continuing our search for new Federation colony sites.
 (reads PADD) All right then, let's move on to the next survey region... Have stellar cartography begin a--
 Mister Data, report.
 (to com) Picard to Engineering. Mister La Forge, what's going on down there?
 Data, what's our heading?
 Begin the procedure, Mister La Forge...
 (to com) Good work, Geordi.
 (to com) Well, I want an explanation. Picard out.
 Have you found anything, yet?
 (concerned) Why didn't the sensors alert us?
 Picard to La Forge. What's going on? We just went into warp...
 Explain.
 (to Data) And you think the ship has somehow gone beyond those functions... has developed a new capacity...
 Processing center... ?
 Very well. Mister Data, Mister Worf, you'll go along. See if there's any way to re-establish control of the ship without destroying the nodes. (MORE)
 (beat) If this ship truly is an emerging intelligence, then it's our responsibility to treat it with the same respect we would give any other being.
 Did everyone get out in time?
 Get a team down there immediately. I want to know what's going on.
 Picard here... what's going on?
 What is this object?
 Counselor, were you able to draw any other conclusions from your experience on the Holodeck? Anything that might help us handle this situation?
 Is there any possibility that we might be able to persuade them to give back control of the ship?
 Is there a way to... relate to them on their own level... influence their behavior in some way... ?
 Go ahead, Counselor. But keep this in mind... so far, we've tried to thwart the ship in all its efforts. And that's gotten us nowhere. (beat) Maybe it's time to try cooperating.
 What's our heading?
 (to Picard) Vertion particles... "Vertiform" City. This is what the ship was looking for...
 (to com) Geordi... what's going on?
 Can you be more specific?
 (to Com) Picard here.
 Yes -- a ship-wide shutdown. We've lost attitude control and most systems are off-line.
 Are you suggesting that the Enterprise has been attempting to create... a lifeform?
 Will it... survive?
 Let's get back to the Bridge.
 Picard here.
 (to Riker) What's our course?
 Another white dwarf star?
 Will the object in the cargo bay survive that long?
 (to com) Mister Data, we have to stop the Enterprise. That means you have to get control of that train.
 (to Geordi) The ship is looking for vertion particles... and it believes that the Cordannas system is the closest source... (beat) Is there another source -- something closer?
 Then what about artificial sources? Is there any way to create them?
 Well, we have to give it a try. The nebula or the pulsar? It's your choice, Mister La Forge.
 Very well. Begin the torpedo modifications.
 Stand by. (to Geordi) Are we within sensor range of the nebula?
 (to com) Mister Data, try to slow us to impulse speed.
 Are the torpedo modifications complete?
 Launch torpedo.
 Then the purpose of the ship's intelligence... was simply to bring that life form into being...
 Captain's Log, supplemental. The Enterprise is back under our control. All traces of the emergent intelligence are gone... and the object it created has disappeared into space...
 Come.
 I'd be honored. Which scene?
 (smiles) "Oh brave new world that has such people in it."
 Why do you say that?
 And I've allowed it to go off on its merry way.
 The intelligence that formed on the Enterprise... it didn't just come out of the ship's systems -- it came out of us. Our mission records, our personal logs, even our Holodeck programs -- our fantasies.
 (continuing) If our experiences with the Enterprise have been honorable...
 (continuing) Then can't we trust the sum of those experiences to be the same?
 Captain's Log, Stardate 47941.7. The Enterprise is en route to a briefing on the situation in the Demilitarized Zone along the Cardassian border. Meanwhile, we are celebrating the return of an old friend.
 Picard to Lieutenant Ro.
 Please report to the Bridge.
 You seemed a bit overwhelmed by all the attention... I thought you could use a break.
 You're looking fit, Lieutenant. Tactical Training must have agreed with you.
 That school is more than a challenge. Half the class washes out every year. (MORE)
 (beat) Somehow I knew you wouldn't be one of those.
 (hits combadge) Go ahead.
 Change course to intercept -- I'm on my way. (to Ro) I'd like you at the Conn, Lieutenant.
 Report.
 Can you identify them?
 On screen.
 Isolate one and magnify.
 (continuing) The Maquis... (beat, grim) Open a channel.
 To all Maquis ships -- call off your attack or we will be forced to engage you.
 You are Federation citizens. Your actions are in violation of our treaty with the Cardassians. Call off your attack.
 Are we in firing range?
 Arm phasers and photon torpedoes and stand by.
 Mister Worf, can you detonate a torpedo spread between the Maquis ships and the Cardassians?
 Do it.
 Signal the Cardassians that we're standing by to assist them if they have any wounded.
 Gul Evek. I'm sorry we weren't able to come to your aid sooner.
 I assure you that's not the case. We're doing everything we can to control them.
 It was certainly not through official channels.
 Starfleet does not condone the Maquis' actions in the Demilitarized Zone. (beat) Any more than your government condones paramilitary actions by Cardassian civilians.
 Considering that they destroyed a Juhryan freighter less than a week ago, I'd say your efforts have met with limited success.
 What you're proposing would only perpetuate the cycle of violence.
 Captain's Log, supplemental. Gul Evek and his crew have left the Enterprise, and we have proceeded to our rendezvous with Admiral Nechayev.
 Twice seemed to be pushing it a little...
 You missed Gul Evek by a matter of hours. I asked him to stay -- I thought perhaps an admiral's assurances would convince him that we are trying to deal with the Maquis situation.
 (for what it's worth) Gul Evek assures me that practice has stopped.
 Admiral... this Maquis situation has you worried...
 Frankly, I can understand why our colonists have taken up arms -- Starfleet isn't there to protect them anymore.
 Perhaps you need an undercover operative.
 Because of your recent training... because you're Bajoran... and because of your past troubles with Starfleet -- you'll have a certain credibility.
 Immediately.
 This is a rare case where our interests coincide with theirs -- we both want peace in the Demilitarized Zone.
 We're all sympathetic, Lieutenant. Our civilian population in the Demilitarized Zone is in a difficult situation. (beat) But sympathy ends at a certain point. The peace treaty isn't just a piece of paper. If the Maquis force us into a war with Cardassia, it could mean hundreds of thousands of lives.
 Laren, two years ago, Starfleet would never have tapped you for this mission. They must have a lot of confidence in you now.
 Captain's Log, Stardate 47943.2. It has been over a week since Lieutenant Ro left the Enterprise... we have yet to receive any communication from her.
 Are there any other ships in the vicinity?
 Helm, set course for the Topin system. (to Data) Signal the science ship that we're on our way.
 Will we be able to use our sensors to find them?
 (to Data) Can you locate the signal?
 Can you decode it?
 Do it.
 Ro... is on that ship... ?
 Let it through.
 Let it go. (beat) There must be someone with her... We should make it look like we're trying to stop them. (to Worf) Lock phasers on their previous position and fire.
 Captain's Log, supplemental. Having earned the Maquis' trust with her raid on the Enterprise, Lieutenant Ro has been given access to a ship and allowed to leave the settlement by herself.
 Frankly, I find it hard to believe. Every ship going into the Demilitarized Zone is being searched.
 We might be able to use that...
 We've come up with a plan that has the potential to seriously curtail the Maquis.
 (continuing) We want to give them a target so threatening -- that they'd be willing to commit as many people and ships as possible to destroy it.
 Bio-genic weapons, for example. You could provide the Maquis with intelligence that the Cardassians are in fact supplying their colonists with them.
 You could tell them that in order to get past the check-points, the Cardassians are shipping the components for these weapons through third parties. We'll put together a convoy and send it toward the Demilitarized Zone.
 We'll station our ships in the Hugora Nebula to avoid detection.
 That's correct.
 Our intention is to outnumber them so heavily that they'll have no choice but to surrender.
 I hope you're wrong. Because if they don't, we'll have to try to disable their vessels... (beat) -- you know as well as I do that's not always possible.
 (continuing) If you have a problem with any of this, I need to know now.
 I knew I could count on you...
 What is it?
 No. Something must have gone wrong.
 Ale.
 I hope not.
 I'd like that.
 Why?
 But there are only six ships. We could even cut down the number.
 Every intelligence report I get from Starfleet suggests that the Maquis are eager to expand their strikes... are looking to escalate their activity... but you're telling me that's not true... ?
 (softly) Laren... what's going on?
 Yes.
 What?
 Laren, are you telling me you want to back out of this mission?
 This has nothing to do with me -- it's about you. If you back out now, you'll be throwing away everything you've worked for.
 And just prolong the inevitable? No. (beat) We're committed to this mission. My only question to you is -- can you carry out your orders?
 (continuing) Lieutenant... I could put you before a board of inquiry for having lied to me about this operation. I could certainly have you court martialed if you sabotage it. (beat) But I don't want to have to threaten you to do this... I want you to make the decision.
 I feel it necessary to have Commander Riker return with you. He can pose as a relative.
 (continuing) To make sure nothing happens that might obstruct this mission.
 (loudly) Sorry -- I don't have that kind of money.
 Captain's Log, supplemental. We have received word from Commander Riker and Lieutenant Ro that the Maquis will be attacking the convoy as planned... our ships have taken up position in the Hugora Nebula to wait for them.
 As soon as they cross the border, we'll intercept them...
 Go to red alert.
 What the hell is she doing?
 Can you counter the effect?
 Have they crossed the border?
 When she comes aboard... take her into custody...
 She let us all down...
 Counselor!
 (urgent) What's today's date? The date?
 (to himself) 47988...
 I'm not sure... I don't know how... or why, but... (beat) I'm moving back and forth through time.
 It was as though I had physically left the ship and gone to another time and place... I was in the past...
 It's all slipping away so fast... like waking up from a nightmare...
 (continuing) It was years ago... before I took command of the Enterprise. I was talking with someone... I don't remember who... (beat, remembering) But then -- everything changed. I wasn't in the past any longer... I was an old man, in the future... I was doing something outside... what was it?
 I'm sorry. It's gone. I can't remember...
 It was more than a dream... the smells and the sounds... the way things felt to the touch... it was all so real...
 I'm not sure. (struggling to recall) At first... there was a moment of confusion, of disorientation. I wasn't sure where I was. But that passed... and then I felt perfectly natural... as though I belonged in that time. But I can't remember how long I stayed there. (frustrated) I know this doesn't make much sense... it's a feeling more than a distinct memory.
 Geordi...
 (snorts) Hasn't been Ambassador for a while either.
 How about... Jean-Luc?
 Good Lord, Geordi. How long has it been?
 No, no... I mean, since you last called me Captain? When was the last time we were all together... on the Enterprise?
 Twenty-five years... (looks him over) Time's been good to you.
 Oh... I'm just tying some vines.
 How is Leah?
 And the little ones... Bret and Alandra? And...
 So what brings you here?
 Don't give me that. You don't make the trip from Rigel Three to Earth just to... drop by.
 So. You've heard.
 (softer) Well... as long as you're here, you can help me carry in some of these tools.
 (continuing) My cooking may not be up to Leah's standards, but I can still make a decent cup of tea.
 (continuing) By the way, I read your last novel. Not bad. I thought the protagonist was written a bit flamboyantly, but that's just my --
 I'm sorry, Lieutenant. My mind seems to have wandered for a moment... (beat) What were you saying?
 No. I'm, of course, very familiar with the blueprints and specifications... but this will be my first time aboard.
 I'm sure she is.
 No. You just seem very... familiar.
 Tasha... I was just with Tasha, in the shuttle...
 Actually, I just like running around the ship in my bare feet.
 A defect... that you've never noticed before?
 (smiles wryly) Then why do you look like you've just signed my death sentence?
 Well, let's not worry about it. (beat) Something tells me you're going to have to put up with me for a very long time.
 (to Riker) Did Worf find anything?
 It wasn't a dream... something did happen.
 (to com) Go ahead, Lieutenant.
 Beverly?
 (continuing, to com) Mister Worf, route it through to Doctor Crusher's office.
 Admiral.
 Is there any indication why they would make such a blatantly aggressive move?
 What are our orders?
 Am I authorized to enter the Zone?
 Understood.
 This isn't my time. I belong somewhere else...
 I mean... I... I wasn't here a moment ago...
 No, no... I was somewhere else... a long time ago... (beat) I was talking to someone... Beverly... Beverly was there...
 (emphatic) I'm not senile. It did happen. I was here, with you... and then I was in another place... (beat) It was... it was back on the Enterprise! (MORE)
 (suddenly unsure) At least, I think it was... it seemed like Sickbay... but maybe it was a hospital... or...
 (louder) No. I know what you're thinking. It's the Irumodic Syndrome -- it's beginning to -- to affect the old man's mind. Well, it's not that. And I wasn't daydreaming, either.
 I want to see Data.
 I think he can help...
 (angry) I don't know! I don't know, but I want to see him!
 Yes... yes... I think he's...
 (urgent, to Geordi) Do you see them?
 They're everywhere... laughing at me... why are they laughing?
 Yes... Data... yes...
 I know how it sounds... but it happened. It was real. I was back on the Enterprise.
 Tea? Earl Grey. Hot.
 Nothing...
 This is quite a place you have here, Data. I see they treat Professors pretty well at Cambridge...
 Is this Earl Grey? I'd swear it was breakfast tea.
 A week ago. I was prescribed peridaxon. (MORE)
 (quickly) And yes, I know it's not a cure... nothing can stop the deterioration of my... my synaptic pathways... (beat) You think I'm senile... that this is all some... delusion.
 That's the Data I remember! I knew I could count on you!
 (to all) To Captain Jean-Luc Picard, Stardate 41148...
 (reading) ... You are hereby requested and required to take command...
 ... to take command of the USS Enterprise as of this date. Signed Rear Admiral Norah Satie, Starfleet Command.
 
 (yells) Red Alert! All hands to Battle Stations!
 Personal Log: Stardate 41153.7. Recorded under security lockout Omega three-two-seven. I have decided not to inform this crew of my experiences. If it's true that I've travelled to the past, I cannot risk giving them foreknowledge of what's to come.
 Report.
 Noted. (to Troi) Counselor, do you sense anything unusual aboard the Enterprise... an alien presence that doesn't belong here... perhaps operating on a level of intelligence far superior to our own?
 Mister Worf, I want you to initiate a Level Two Security Alert on all decks until further notice.
 No... no, of course not. Security Alert Two, Lieutenant.
 (to com) On my way, Chief.
 (off PADD) It says a large spatial anomaly has appeared in the Neutral Zone... (beat) In the Devron System.
 No... no, we'll proceed to Farpoint.
 You heard me.
 Man your station, Mister Worf.
 I don't intend to explain anything... (to all) ... to anyone. We will proceed to Farpoint Station, as originally planned.
 (continuing, to O'Brien) Now, if I'm not mistaken, Chief, we're having some problems with the warp plasma inducers.
 I think I know a way to get them back on-line. You're with me. (to Tasha) We'll be in Main Engineering.
 Mister O'Brien, use these specifications to bypass the secondary plasma inducer.
 But the Chief Engineer isn't on board yet. (beat) Mister O'Brien... trust me. I know you can do this.
 All those years you spent as a child... building model starship engines... were well worth it.
 From... your Starfleet records.
 Commander Data, welcome aboard -- it's good to see you.
 I could use your help with the infusor array.
 As you can see, we're having difficulty with the plasma conduits...
 It happened again.
 Yes...
 It's still a little vague, but I can remember more this time. I think the more I shift between time periods, the more memory I retain... (MORE)
 (thinks) First, I was in what appeared to be the future... years from now. Then I was in the past again... right before our first mission...
 (to Troi) Counselor, do you remember the first day I came aboard the Enterprise?
 What happened after the welcoming ceremony?
 Do you have any memory of me calling for a Red Alert in spacedock? Do you remember Starfleet diverting us from Farpoint to the Neutral Zone to investigate a spatial anomaly?
 For all I know, there may be one in the future, too.
 These are good questions. And I suspect I might find some answers when I return to the past... but for now we're facing a potentially dangerous threat from the Romulans. (beat) All departments should submit combat readiness reports by oh eight hundred hours tomorrow. Dismissed.
 (to Data) ... and I want continuous subspace sweeps. We might detect a temporal disturbance.
 Wil... this time shifting... when it happens, I experience a moment of disorientation. If this should happen during a crisis, I want you to be ready to take command immediately.
 Number One?
 Speaking of disorientation... are you all right?
 You have the Bridge. I'll be in my Ready Room.
 Come.
 What's this?
 Beverly...
 (lightly) Yes, sir.
 (continuing) What's wrong?
 (continuing) Beverly.
 You said yourself it's only a possibility.
 I prefer to think of the future as something that is not written in stone. A lot of things can happen in twenty-five years.
 Yes... yes, what is it? Have we reached the Neutral Zone?
 Sorry... I was... in the past again... (beat) What's going on?
 No... no, we don't have time for that. We have to get to the Neutral Zone.
 In the other two time periods... Starfleet reported a... uh... some kind of... spatial anomaly in the... in the... (beat) ... in the Devron System! The Devron System in the Neutral Zone!
 (thinking) If the anomaly was in the past... it might be here, too. We have to go find out...
 But if it is -- that means something! Damnit, Geordi -- I know what we have to do!
 (struggling) Right... right. Klingons... in this time period, the Klingons have taken over the Romulan Empire...
 I know that. I haven't completely lost my mind, you know.
 (continuing) Sorry, Geordi... it's hard for me to concentrate... and remember things... I don't mean to take out that frustration on you...
 I think it's time to call in some old favors... (beat) Contact Admiral Riker at Starbase Two-four-seven.
 Wil... if this... spatial anomaly really is in the Devron System...
 I don't believe that! Maybe their long-range scanners are flawed... we have to go there, see for ourselves!
 That's not good enough.
 (angry) Damn him anyway... after all we've been through together... he's been sitting behind that desk too long.
 Medical ship?
 (excited) Yes... yes...
 I think I can arrange that. (to Data) Find the USS Pasteur. I have some pull with the Captain. (beat, then concerned) At least, I used to...
 Let's just... choose one.
 Well. Did you get my message?
 Ah. So that's why you married me.
 Worf... yes, that's it... that's the answer. Worf. He'll help us. Let's make it so.
 (overlapping) Yes?
 Kept the name, eh?
 I'm fine. I don't need any rest.
 I can find my way around a starship!
 You're all treating me like an invalid, but I assure you I've got a few years left. I don't need to be led around and I don't want to be patronized.
 I'll go have a rest.
 We'll find the anomaly... I know we will...
 Report.
 (to Data) Is there anything unusual in the vicinity?
 There should be a... "barrier" of some sort nearby. A large plasma field... highly disruptive.
 It's the right time... right place... he should be here...
 (calls out) Q! We're here! This has gone on long enough! What sort of game are you playing?
 (continuing, to Troi) Counselor, do you sense an alien presence?
 (quiet) This is not the way it's supposed to happen... (to all) Maintain position here. I'll be in my Ready Room.
 Q... I thought so. What's going on?
 The last time I stood in this courtroom was seven years ago...
 (doggedly) You accused me of being the representative of a barbarous species...
 But we demonstrated that mankind has become peaceful and benevolent. You agreed, and let us go on our way. (looking around) Why do I find myself back in this courtroom?
 Are you putting mankind on trial again?
 Is there any connection at all between the trial seven years ago... and whatever's going on now?
 The spatial anomaly in the Neutral Zone -- is it related to what's happening?
 Is it part of a Romulan plot? A ploy to start a war?
 That's only four --
 Did you create the anomaly?
 (trying another tack) Are you responsible for my shifting through time?
 Why?
 Guilty of what?
 We have journeyed to countless new worlds... made contact with new species... expanded man's understanding of the universe...
 We are what we are, Q -- and we're doing the best we can. It's not for you to set the standard by which we're judged.
 (tight) Having rendered a verdict... have you decided upon a sentence?
 We're to be denied travel through space?
 Q... even you could not be capable of such an act --
 Me...
 What sort of meaningless doubletalk is that?
 (to com) Commander, assemble the Senior Staff and go to Red Alert. (beat) We have a bigger problem than we thought.
 I think that this time, we have no choice but to take him at his word... which means that in some fashion, I will cause the destruction of humanity.
 So what should I do -- just lock myself in a room in all three time periods?
 Agreed. (beat) I've been thinking about my conversation with Q. He admitted that he was responsible for my shifting through time...
 (continuing) It occurred to me... that perhaps Q is giving me a chance to save mankind somehow.
 Q has always shown a certain... fascination with humanity... and specifically with me. I think he has more than a casual interest in what happens to me.
 If I weren't traveling through time... I would never have realized that the anomaly in the Neutral Zone appeared there in the past as well. (beat) Assuming that's an important piece of a larger puzzle, my ability to shift through time may be the key to understanding what's going on.
 Go ahead.
 On our way.
 All stop. Initiate a long range scan.
 We are. Mister Worf, hail the Romulan flagship.
 On screen.
 Worf, surely you still have some influence. We must get into the Neutral Zone.
 Can't you at least grant us permission to cross the border?
 I don't care what kind of ship we're in -- the important thing is to get to the Devron System --
 Maybe I'm just an old man who doesn't understand... but the Worf I knew cared more about things like loyalty and honor than he did rules and regulations. (beat) But then, that was a long time ago. Maybe you're not the Worf I knew.
 (right back at him) That's because it always works. Your problem, Worf, is that you really do have a sense of honor... you really do care about things like loyalty and trust. Don't blame me because I know you too well.
 Terms accepted.
 Engage.
 Set course for the Devron System, and engage at warp nine.
 I'm aware of that, Lieutenant. Carry out my orders, Chief.
 Of course. (to Tasha) Lieutenant, contact Farpoint Station. I want to talk to Commander Riker.
 They don't trust me... they think I'm behaving erratically.
 I understand that. But I know what this crew is capable of, even if they don't.
 I know it's difficult operating in the dark, Counselor. But for now, I think it's the only choice.
 Put him through in here.
 Commander. I just wanted to let you know we'll be delayed in picking you up at Farpoint Station.
 I'm not sure. I'll keep you updated. Please inform Doctor Crusher and Lieutenant La Forge of our delay.
 Is there anything else, Counselor?
 What about him?
 I see. Do you anticipate this interfering with your duties?
 I appreciate your telling me... but I'm sure the two of you will find a way to... deal with the situation.
 (continuing) Tea. Earl Grey. Hot.
 There is another alternative, Tomolak. We're both here for the same reason. We could each send one ship into the Neutral Zone to investigate the anomaly in the Devron System.
 No.
 You needn't make threats. I think we're all aware of the consequences.
 (to Conn Officer) Set course for the Devron system. Warp five. Engage.
 All stop. On screen.
 (to Data) Full scan, Mister Data.
 All stop. Put it onscreen.
 (continuing, to himself) It's bigger in the past...
 Nothing. Full scan, Mister Data.
 On screen! On screen! Let's see it!
 Have you scanned the entire subspace bandwidth?
 I don't understand. I've already seen it in the other two -- the other two time periods. Why isn't it here?
 You're not thinking about leaving?
 There should be -- there has to be! (MORE)
 (to Data) Data, there must be some other way to scan for temporal disturbances... something that's not covered in a normal sensor sweep.
 Very good! Make it so!
 Six hours may not be enough. We have to stay here until we find it -- no matter how long it takes!
 Beverly, I can't believe you're not willing to stay here until --
 I'm just trying to... there are larger concerns here... don't you understand that --
 You're right... I was out of line... it won't happen again... (beat) But, you have to understand... the stakes here are enormous. Q has said all of humanity will be destroyed...
 What... ?
 Q... what's going on here? Where's the anomaly?
 Stop this foolishness and answer me!
 What help?
 My time shifting... the answer does lie there... (beat) Just tell me one thing... this anomaly we're looking for... is that what destroys humanity?
 By doing what? When? How are you --
 (to Data) Report, Mister Data.
 What is the source of that energy?
 What if we modified the main deflector to emit an... inverse tachyon pulse. That might scan beyond the subspace barrier... give us an idea what the interior of this thing looks like.
 I have some friends who are quite well versed in the matter. Make it so.
 (peering) Yes... I can see the iris...
 How is this possible?
 Anti-time?
 (catching on) So if time and anti-time were to collide...
 You mean his eyes are getting... younger?
 So the temporal anomaly has certain... rejuvenating effects. It certainly doesn't sound like the destruction of humanity. (beat) Data, what could have caused this collision between time and anti-time?
 (to Data) I believe that if we modify the deflector to send out an inverse tachyon pulse, you'll find that the anomaly is a rupture between time and anti-time.
 It would take too long to explain. Begin the modifications and send out the pulse. Once you've done that, start working on a theory as to what could have caused this rupture.
 Mister O'Brien... how big is the anomaly?
 I still don't understand why it's larger here...
 On screen.
 Why have you come here?
 We can't really be certain that the... Light... has this power. And there may be dangers, side effects we're not aware of...
 It would be safer for all concerned if you left the Neutral Zone... and let us investigate the phenomenon more fully.
 I warn you that if the Romulans should decide to intervene, I may not be able to protect you.
 (to Tasha) You have the Bridge, Lieutenant. I'll be in my Ready Room.
 What's going on?
 (to Worf) Weapons status?
 Warp core breach... that may be it. We have to stop it!
 We don't have time for this. The Pasteur's core is going to breach.
 No... we can't... we have to save humanity...
 (to Riker) Wil, don't leave! We have to stay here -- find the cause of the temporal anomaly...
 We have to! Everything depends on this! We can't leave now -- please listen to me!
 How is she?
 So this is affecting the entire crew...
 We also have to find out how widespread this effect is. (to Troi) Send an inquiry to Starbase Twenty-three -- they're the nearest outpost -- have them begin checking their personnel for any signs of temporal reversion.
 Mister Data, how long until we've completed the tachyon scan?
 Good. Once it's completed, I want you to find a way to dissipate the anomaly without making things worse. Give me a risk analysis on whatever solution you come up with.
 Dismissed.
 Why? Will that cause the destruction of mankind?
 Home?
 Is there a point to all this?
 The anomaly is here, at Earth... ?
 The further back in time... the larger the anomaly.
 You mean I caused the anomaly... and the anomaly... in some way... disrupted the beginning of life on Earth.
 Inform Starfleet Command that we believe the anomaly has toxic effects. Tell them I'm ordering the Terrellian ships back to Federation territory, but that we're staying here.
 Yes. We have to find a way to collapse this anomaly. (to Troi) Counselor, prepare to evacuate all civilians and non-essential personnel to the Terrellians ships.
 Data, O'Brien, you're with me.
 Let's concentrate on how this anomaly was initially formed. Speculation?
 I think I can rule out a warp core explosion.
 Can you find a way to scan the interior?
 Do you know what could?
 Data... do we have a tomographic imaging scanner on board?
 Can you use it to scan the interior of the anomaly?
 What is it?
 Three pulses... from three time periods... all converging at one point in space.
 Computer, where's Admiral Riker?
 Ensign. How... do I get to Ten Forward?
 Thank you.
 Wil! I know what's happening... I know what causes the anomaly... we have to go back!
 Damnit Wil, I know what's happening. We're causing the anomaly... with a... with the tachyon pulse... it happened in all three time periods. We do it in all three time periods!
 Leave me alone! I'm not crazy. The tachyon pulses... they -- they were used in the same spot -- in all three time periods... don't you see? When the tachyon pulse used the -- I mean, when the Pasteur used the tachyon pulse, we set the -- you know -- we... started everything... we set it in motion.
 It's like... the chicken and the egg! You think it started back then... but it didn't... it started here in the future... that's why it gets larger in the past...
 Yes! Yes, exactly!
 Yes! That's why the anomaly was larger in the past. It was growing as it travelled backward through time.
 Go back. Go back to the Devron System.
 I was right...
 We've got to stop it here... so it won't be able to travel back through time...
 (serious) The next time I'm there, that's the first thing I'll do.
 (quickly) Data, disengage the tachyon pulse.
 Just do it. The convergence of tachyon pulses from the three time periods is what causes the anomaly.
 Report. Is there any change in the anomaly?
 Disengage the tachyon pulse.
 I know that. But it's imperative that you disengage it immediately.
 Why isn't the anomaly affected?
 (to all) I've shut off the tachyon pulses in the other time periods -- but the anomaly didn't change.
 That could be a problem... the anomaly's so much larger in the other time periods...
 (continuing) ... It could be dangerous to take the ship in.
 Into the anomaly, Chief. Lay in a course to the exact center. Transfer all available power to the shields.
 No. I cannot.
 (continuing) I know all of you have doubts about me... about each other... about the ship. All I can say is that even though we've only been together for a short time... I know that you are the finest crew in the fleet... and I would trust each of you with my life. (beat) I'm asking you to make a leap of faith -- and trust me.
 Chief... take us in.
 (overlapping) ... a static warp shell, it could repair the barrier and collapse the anomaly.
 Mister Data, you're a clever man -- in any time period.
 (continuing) Lay in a course to the center of the anomaly. Prepare to initiate a static warp shell.
 The other two Enterprises... they're on their way.
 All hands brace for impact!
 Maintain course and speed! (to Data) Mister Data, how long until we reach the center?
 Initiate warp shell!
 No. We have to maintain the static warp shell for as long as possible!
 (quickly, to Geordi) Transfer emergency power to the anti-matter containment system!
 Maintain position! Mister La Forge --
 (to Data) Data, report!
 Are you saying it worked? We collapsed the anomaly?
 Q, did it work?
 What about my crew?
 Thank you.
 You had a hand in helping me get out of this.
 I sincerely hope this is the last time I'll find myself here.
 When I realized the paradox...
 What are you trying to tell me, Q?
 Worf... what's the date?
 No, no... in fact, I think I'll go back to bed. I could use some sleep.
 Captain's Log, supplemental. Starfleet Command reports no unusual activity along the Neutral Zone, and there is no sign of a temporal anomaly. It would appear that I am the only member of the crew to retain any knowledge of the events I experienced.
 No. I just thought I might... join you this evening. If there's room...
 Oh... thank you.
 (continuing) I should have done this a long time ago. I was quite a card player in my youth, you know.
 So. Five card stud, nothing wild. The sky's the limit.
